"a1","Zonation and succession The Lemnetum gibbae is typically found as floating mats adjacent to or among emergents of eutrophic and more shallow open waters. In the early stages of recovery after disturbance, it may be the only kind of truly aquatic vegetation, but it can occur with other duckweed com munities and, as succession resumes in the clearing waters, submerged plants can develop beneath it and floating or floating-leaved macrophytes among it, these latter able to replace it in time. With the increasing eutrophication and pollution of lowland water bodies, the Lemnetum gibbae may become a more extensive permanent feature. Very commonly around the fringes of ditches and ponds with fine mineral substrates, the community occurs among semi-submerged mats and emergent shoots of such water-margin vegetation as the Glycerietum fluitantis or other Glycerio-Sparganion assemblages dominated locally by plants like Nasturtium officinale, Apium nodiflorum, Berula erecta, Veronica beccabunga or Callitriche stagnalis, themselves well suited to the periodic instability of such habitats. In other cases, the Lemnetum gibbae can be found among emergent stands of the Sparganietum erecti, the Glycerietum maximae, the Typhetum latifoliae, the Phragmitetum or, in brackish ditches, the Scirpetum maritimae, and these may provide shelter for the duckweed mats out into deeper water. Where the water is standing or sluggish and relatively unaffected by wind, the Lemnetum can extend out as a surface mat beyond the zone of swamp vegetation and is sometimes the only kind of floating aquatic community. In other places, though, it can be found with the Lemnetum minoris, grading to it with a switch in dominance from L. gibba to L. minor, or with the richer Spirodela-Hydrocharis community, both of which it can probably replace. Where there has been regrowth of floating-leaved aquatics, the Lemnetum gibbae can occur as mosaics with the Potamogeton natans, Polygonum amphibium or Nuphar lutea communities, and as a mat over a variety of submerged aquatic vegetation, especially assemblages typical of more eutrophic or somewhat brackish waters, like the Ceratophylletum submersi, the Ceratophylletum demersi, the Elodea canadensis community and some of the fine-leaved Potamogeton communities. With regular disturbance and increasing enrichment, the Lemnetum gibbae may become repeatedly or more or less permanently established as part of a more impoverished suite of aquatic communities. Distribution "