"a10","Zonation and succession The Polygonum community occurs in its more permanent aquatic habitats with a variety of other free- floating and floating-leaved vegetation, and sometimes with an abundant submerged element. Emergents or water-margin plants often grow through stands in their colonisation of more shallow open waters and, provided the cover is not too densely shading, patches of P. amphibium can remain among these into quite advanced states of terrestrialisation. Periodically flooded ground with this kind of vegetation usually has mosaics or zonations with a variety of inundation communities. Sometimes, the Polygonum community is the only kind of floating-leaved vegetation in open waters, par ticularly where banks drop sharply to some depth or where there is marked fluctuation. Often, though, it occurs with stands of the Nymphaeetum or the Nuphar or Potamogeton natans communities and, where there is a gentle increase in depth, these can grow much further out than P. amphibium and may form an extensive zone beyond it. In other cases, small patches of all these vegetation types can occur in more intimate and frag mentary disposition, as in many small pools, and canals, or along the length of dykes and river margins. Stands of the Lemnetum minoris frequently persist among the Polygonum community, and these two types of vege tation may be among the first to return in any abundance after periodic spates. Stiller waters, particularly those that are somewhat more eutrophic, can have Elodea canadensis vegetation beneath the Polygonum community or sometimes the Potamogeton pectinatus-Myriophyllum spicatum vege tation, while around the margins of lakes towards the north and west there can be a sparse Littorella-Lobelia sward over the substrate. In these latter situations, the Polygonum community can be found as an element in vegetation patterns which do not seem to be subject to any but the slowest of successions (Spence 1964), and it can persist in more open stands of swamps like the Caricetum rostratae, the Caricetum vesicariae, the Equisetetum fluviatilis and the Scirpetum lacustris where these have colonised shal lower open water, and remain in patches in marginal Potentillo-Caricetum fen rafts. In the lowlands, and particularly in more mesotrophic water bodies with mineral substrates, serai processes can proceed much more quickly if the dykes or pools are not kept open. Here, the Polygonum community can be found beyond or within advancing emergent vegetation like the Glycerietum maximae, the Caricetum ripariae, the Typhetum angustifoliae, the Typhetum latifoliae and the Sparganietum erecti, eventually being shaded out in dense stands. It also often occurs around water margins with various types of Glycerio-Sparganion vegetation and this kind of association is characteristic, too, of some periodically wet habitats like flood-plain pools or seasonally wet lowland streams. At the limit of gleying around such places, there can be a zone of the Phalaridetum. Particularly distinctive of situations that are inundated from time to time are patchworks of the Polygonum community, occupying the wettest areas, with various kinds of Bidention vegetation disposed over moist silts and sands around, species such as Bidens tripartita, Polygonum lapathifolium, P. mite and P. hydropiper often assuming local dominance in virtually pure stands of one or other species. These in turn can be surrounded by a zone of Elymo-Rumicion vegetation, like the Festuca-Agrostis-Potentilla community which can grade in virtually continuous fashion to unflooded pasture on higher ground. Distribution "