"a11","Zonation and succession The Potamogeton-M. spicatum community is found alone, or with other submerged aquatic vegetation, extending to the limits of colonisation in less turbulent, base-rich waters, thinning out in more exposed situations and being replaced by other communities where conditions become less calcareous and eutrophic. Open covers of floating or floating-leaved aquatics can be found on the surface above the community and in shallower waters there can be invasion by swamp vegetation. Through the lowlands of southern and eastern Bri tain, the P. pusillus and Elodea sub-communities can be found in less polluted, sluggish waters grading to locally dense stands of Elodea vegetation in which associate species are very few and sparse, or in shaded situations to luxuriant patches of the Ceratophylletum demersi. Very commonly, too, especially with the Elodea sub community, there is an associated floating mat of the Lemnetum minoris or sometimes an open cover of the Polygonum amphibium, Potamogeton natans or Nuphar lutea floating-leaved vegetation. The most frequently associated swamps of open-water transitions from such aquatic assemblages are the Sparganietum erecti, the Typhetum latifoliae, the Phragmitetum and the Glycerietum maximae, with the Caricetum ripariae and Scirpetum lacustris more occasionally represented. Around the shelving water margins of small pools, dykes and canals and along the banks of streams, various kinds of Gly- cerio-Sparganion vegetation can also be found trailing out into the Potamogeton-M. spicatum community. Where there is an increase in turbulence in such waters, shifting into wave-disturbed zones or into more fast-moving or spatey streams, the P. pusillus and Elodea sub-communities become increasingly sparse in cover, and impoverished in their species content, such that just scattered, puny plants of P. pectinatus and M. spicatum finally remain. Further upstream in base-rich moving waters, these kinds of vegetation can be replaced by the Ranunculetum fluitantis, the Ranunculus penicillatus community or Callitriche stands. Patterns involving the P. filiformis sub-community in its distinctive north-west Scottish sites are of a rather different character, particularly where there is some influence within the same loch or pool of peaty, base poor waters, quite a common and very striking feature over parts of the machair. Here, such submerged vege tation as the Elodea communities and the Ceratophylletum demersi are rarely present, although where there is some saline influence, the Potamogeton-M . spicatum vegetation may give way to the Ruppietum maritimae in which such species as P. pectinatus, Ranunculus baudotii, Hippuris vulgaris and Zannichellia palustris maintain some representation. More often, with the decreasing influence of shell-sand, there is a fall in pH and conductivity of the waters and the community is replaced by the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum vegetation. The P. filiformis sub-community can be seen as transitional to this assemblage and, indeed, P. pectinatus, P. filiformis, P. pusillus and P. natans can run on into it at moderately high frequency and with some local abundance. Typically, though, it is P. perfoliatus and P. gramineus which provide the most consistent element of the less calcico- lous vegetation, together with M. alterniflorum, which almost completely replaces M. spicatum. In some places, where peaty shallows pass quite suddenly to shelly beds further out, the switch from one vegetation type to the other is quite sharp, but often the influence of the different substrates is less well defined, when transitions can be extensive. There is often, too, some Littorella uniflora amongst both assemblages, which adds to the https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.015 Published online by Cambridge University PressAll Potamogeton pectinatus-Myriophyllum spicatum community 63 continuity of the pattern, and this can thicken up locally in zonations to the Littorella-Lobelia community, especially where the substrate becomes gravelly. A floating-leaved element may be represented by the Nymphaeetum albae or the Potamogeton natans community and the usual swamps associated with the margins of these waters are the Eleocharitetum palustris, the Equise- tetum fluviatilis, the Caricetum rostratae or, occasionally, the Phragmitetum. Such sites have, for the most part, been spared any marked influence of eutrophication or pollution but, elsewhere, the P. pusillus and Elodea sub-communities have often been replaced by impoverished P. pectinatus vegetation with increased richness and contamination of the waters. Distribution "