"a12","Zonation and succession In highly eutrophicated and polluted sites, this community may be the only kind of aquatic vegetation to survive but, in cleaner conditions, it can be found with various other submerged, floating and floating-leaved assemblages typical of richer waters. In more base-rich pools, dykes and streams, the P. pectinatus community can sometimes be clearly seen as an impoverished form of the Potamogeton-M. spicatum vegetation, developed where this particular species of pondweed has attained local luxuriance, and grading to the richer assemblage with an increase in the frequency and cover of M. spicatum, Elodea canadensis or E. nuttallii and other Potamogeton spp., such as P. perfoliatus, P. crispus, P. pusillus and P. lucens. The Elodea spp. may themselves thicken up patchily into species-poor stands, and there can also be stretches among these mixtures dominated by the Ceratophylletum demersi. The Polygonum amphibium community may also form a canopy of floating leaves in the shallower waters, with Nuphar lutea stands occurring further out in deeper pools, dykes and slow-moving waters. Mats of the Lemnetum gibbae and the Lemnetum minoris may occur in sheltered situations. A variety of emergents can invade the margins of such open waters, with communities like the Sparganietum erecti, the Typhetum latifoliae, the Phragmitetum and the Glycerietum maximae developing as a zone in the shallows or as clumps distributed along the edges of dykes and streams. These may persist around the fringes of eutrophicated and polluted waters, where the aquatic element is reduced to clumps of the P. pectinatus community and sparse Elodea vegetation and Ceratophylletum demersi. In brackish situations, the P. pectinatus community may again be the sole surviving vegetation where there has been some contamination of the waters but, in cleaner dykes and pools in, for example, coastal marshes, it can occur with the richer Potamogeton-M. spicatum assemblage and dense stands of the Ceratophylletum submersi. In this latter, P. pectinatus can maintain its constancy but it yields in abundance to plants such as Ceratophyllum submersi, Zannichellia palustris and Ranunculus baudotii. Floating mats of the Lemnetum minoris can also occur over such vegetation and there can be colonisation by the Scirpetum maritimi or Scirpetum tabernaemontani. Fragmentary patterns of the kind described for fresh waters will persist in quite swift flows, as in mill races, watercress bed feed-streams and the upper reaches of rivers and, in such situations, there is often some zonation to patches of the Callitriche stagnalis community or various kinds of crowfoot vegetation. There can also be some seasonal variation in the prominence of the different dominants too, with C. stagnalis and the Ranunculus spp. showing luxuriance in late spring and early sum mer, P. pectinatus reaching its peak of abundance later in the year, along with the Glycerio-Sparganion vege tation that frequently trails into the margins of such waters. In chalk streams, some of these marginal plants, like Apium nodiflorum and Nasturtium officinale, together with various crowfoot taxa, can penetrate to the higher reaches, while the Callitriche and P. pectinatus communities peter out at lower levels. Along waters draining sandstone rocks and shales, Callitriche vege tation can replace the P. pectinatus community with the shift to swifter flows upstream. Distribution "