"a13","Zonation and succession The Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum community is usually found with other kinds of aquatic vegetation in characteristic zonations of less base-rich and only moderately fertile waters, becoming attenuated with increasing turbulence and giving way to other assemblages where conditions become more calcareous or eutrophic. Colonisation by emergents around the margins of waters with the community is usually fairly slow and in some places succession to swamp may be very long delayed. Sometimes, around the sheltered shores of lakes in north-west Britain, the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum vegetation is the first community of submerged aquatics encountered in moving offshore, colonising fine to fairly coarse sediments deposited in depths of 50 cm or more and free of much turbulence. Very often, however, there is in the shallows inshore, and particularly where these have a coarse sandy or gravelly bed, a zone of Littorella- Lobelia vegetation. As well as Littorella, M. alterniflorum may run on into such swards in some abundance blurring the boundary but, apart from occasional P. perfoliatus, P. gramineus, P. pusillus and P. filiformis, pondweeds are scarce, whereas Lobelia dortmanna increases greatly in frequency and cover. In shallow or moderately deep waters, the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum community may continue and occupy most of the lake floor wherever suitable sediments occur, but quite commonly it is replaced below by a zone of Isoetes lacustris vegetation, as in the patterns described from Scottish lakes described by Spence (1964). Much more locally, usually in smaller and shallower waters, stands of the rare I. setacea can occur among the Potamogeton- M. alterniflorum community. Then, such sequences quite frequently have dense stretches of Chara or Nitella spp. from which flowering plants are virtually absent, and these may extend both above and below the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum vegetation, as in the zonation shown by Pearsall (1918) from Fold Yeat Bay in Esthwaite. In other localities, luxuriant patches of the species-poor M. alterniflorum community can be found among the pondweed vege tation (Spence 1964) and it is sparse stands of this plant which generally replace the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum community in the faster or more spatey stretches of mesotrophic and more base-poor rivers through the upland fringes. In somewhat more fertile, standing or sluggish waters with the P. berchtoldii sub-community, vigorous stands of Elodea vegetation may also be seen and, if eutrophication of upland lakes increases, this might be expected to overwhelm richer pondweed as semblages of this kind. Particularly striking patterns are seen in those open waters in north-west Scotland where the P. filiformis sub-community occurs in the less calcareous shallows of some of the machair lochs, notably on South Uist, grading to the more basiphilous Potamogeton-M. spicatum vegetation where the influence of shell-sand pre vails. Species such as P. pectinatus, M. spicatum, Ranunculus baudotii and Hippuris represent a transition to the P. filiformis sub-community of that assemblage, and where the effect of the different substrates and waters is ill-defined, the stands of the different vegetation types may intergrade. As a rule, however, M. alterniflorum tends to be very sparsely represented in the Potamogeton-M. spicatum community, with P. gramineus usually only occasional. Both kinds of Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum vege tation can be found with a floating-leaf canopy of the Potamogeton natans community, with the Nyphaeetum albae often represented in deeper waters or, in somewhat more eutrophic situations, the Nuphar lutea community. The usual swamps associated with such aquatic assemblages are the Eleocharitetum, the Equisetetum, the Caricetum rostratae, the Scirpetum lacustris and the Pragmitetum, with usual but slow succession to the Potentillo-Caricetum or Caricetum vesicariae fen (Figure 6). Distribution "