"a14","Zonation and succession In both standing and moving waters, the Myriophylletum tends to occupy some of the more turbulent situations, giving way to other kinds of aquatic vegetation where conditions are stiller and substrates more fertile. It is replaced in dystrophic peaty waters by different submerged communities and is sometimes found with more basiphilous aquatic assemblages where there is local influence of lime-rich substrates and waters. In lakes with more acidic waters, the Myriophylletum can be found down to about 3 m depth where conditions are clear, and on moderately exposed shores it often passes in the gravelly or stony shallows to the Littorella- Lobelia community. M. alterniflorum usually remains very frequent in this vegetation, but Littorella uniflora and Lobelia dortmanna become constant and are generally of high cover. Then, in deeper water where there is a little less turbulence and more deposition of fine mineral https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.018 Published online by Cambridge University PressA14 Myriophylletum alterniflori community 75 material, the Myriophylletum gives way to the Potamo- geton-M. alterniflorum community. The two vegetation types intergrade, but there M. alterniflorum is typically accompanied by, not only L. uniflora, but also a variety of pondweeds, of which the commonest are Potamogeton perfoliatus, P. gramineus, P. pusillus, P. berchtoldii and P. obtusifolius, all of these more prone to battering than the milfoil. Dense stands of Chara or Nitella spp. also often occur. A clear zonation involving all these communities is shown in Pearsall ’s (1918) sketch of aquatics in Fold Yeat Bay in Esthwaite. The Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum vegetation can also be seen replacing the Myriophylletum in moving waters where the flow becomes a little slacker or less spate-prone in moving downstream, and the deposition of mineral material more extensive. Towards the upper reaches of such streams, the Myriophylletum can show extensive overlap with the Callitriche stagnalis community, and indeed this vegetation may replace it where vascular plants retain a patchy presence far up into the torrent-like heads of such river systems. In other places, the Myriophylletum represents the limit of such vege tation before bryophyte communities of submerged rocks dominate the aquatic environment. Another fairly frequent transition can be seen where quieter stretches of peaty waters interrupt or replace more fast-flowing rocky reaches with the shift to gentler, boggy terrain. Then, the Myriophylletum often gives way to Potamogeton-Ranunculus soakways, with P. polygonifolius, Ranunculus flammula, R. omiophyllus and Agrostis stolonifera. Pools along such trickling waters may also have Juncus bulbosus vegetation, but M. alterniflorum only rarely extends into such dystrophic assemblages. Distribution "