"a15","Zonation and succession The E. canadensis community can be found with a variety of other submerged aquatic vegetation in more nutrient-rich, standing or slow-moving waters, although where conditions are especially congenial it may over whelm these with its luxuriant growth. Open covers of floating-leaved or floating vegetation may occur above the pondweed, and the community can persist in sparse swamp but, where colonising emergents become dense, it is shaded out. In many lowland ponds, dykes and canals, stands of E. canadensis are a major element among the aquatics, sometimes the only submerged vegetation. Duckweed mats are often found in association, of the simpler kind with Lemna gibba or L. minor or, in purer waters, of the richer Spirodela-Hydrocharis type. In a very few places, as among some of the Broadland dykes, the E. canadensis community occurs in intimate association with Hydrocharis-Stratiotes vegetation. Stands can persist, too, beneath open canopies of the water-lily communities, the Nymphaeetum albae and, more commonly in richer waters, the Nuphar lutea vegetation, or under the Potamogeton natans or Polygonum amphibium communities, but wherever these become dense, E. canadensis tends to be shaded out. Quite often, in such situations, or beneath overhanging woody vegetation alongside dykes or streams or around pond margins, it is replaced by the more tolerant Ceratophylletum demersi. In other places, there is a more varied submerged aquatic flora in which stands of E. canadensis become locally dense among richer assemblages like the Potamogeton-M. spicatum community of cleaner, base-rich, eutrophic waters. However, comparing past and present accounts of aquatic vegetation, it seems certain that some of the spread of E. canadensis has been at the expense of such communities, their diversity in composition and dominance being reduced as a result. The same trend is visible to a lesser extent in the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum vegetation, though this is a community of more base-poor and less eutrophic waters, many of whose stands occur beyond the range of E. canadensis. Both these kinds of pondweed vegetation and related M. alterniflorum stands can also tolerate somewhat more fast-moving waters than the E. canadensis community and they persist, albeit often in attenuated forms, higher upstream than it can penetrate. The same is true of crowfoot vegetation dominated by Ranunculus penicillatus ssp. pseudofluitans and R. flui tans, though these can be found in patchworks with E. canadensis in more slow-moving reaches of streams and https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press78 Aquatic communities rivers, the proportions of the vegetation types often varying from season to season and through any years (Butcher 1933). E. canadensis is sometimes found growing with its more recently introduced relative E. nuttallii, although great abundance of the one is rarely seen among vigorous plants of the other, and it is possible that there is some kind of competitive relationship between the two. Certainly, there are cases where E. nuttallii has been seen actually to replace E. canadensis over a few years (Briggs 1977, Lund 1979), although the basis of such changes is unclear (Simpson 1984). In polluted waters, neither of these pondweeds thrives and, in the many places where effluents have drained into open waters with the E. canadensis community it has been replaced by P. pectinatus vegetation where any vascular plants at all have survived. Many of the more fertile lowland waters favoured by E. canadensis are very prone to marginal invasion of swamp plants, and stands are sometimes found among open covers, the Scirpetum lacustris, the Typhetum latifoliae or Glycerio-Sparganion water-margin vege tation, but any more than light shade is inimical to the pondweed. Distribution "