"a16","Zonation and succession The C. stagnalis community occurs with a wide range of other submerged, floating-leaved and floating aquatic vegetation in diverse patterns in the different habitats in which it is found. In stiller, shallow waters, especially where these are more eutrophic, invasion by emergents is common and sometimes rapid, but C. stagnalis vege tation can persist long on periodically flooded ground among advancing swamps and even reappear in rain- filled pools where climax forest is opened up. In such habitats as dykes, canals and ponds, the community can be found among other more speciespoor assemblages of submerged aquatics like the Ceratophyllum demersi, the Elodea canadensis vegetation and stands of Potamogeton pectinatus, though it is usually more strictly confined than these to shallow waters, and it will not stand as much turbidity as the first, nor as much enrichment and pollution as the last. Cleaner and more base-rich waters, standing or with up to moderately fast flow, may also have the richer and more diverse Potamogeton-M. spicatum community, among which various Callitriche spp. can remain occasional and locally quite abundant. On the surface of these kinds of waters, the Callitriche stands can sometimes be seen in more open stretches of floating-leaved covers of the Nuphar lutea, the Potamogeton natans or the Polygonum amphibium communities and, where the waters are more sluggish or still, there are very often patches of the Lemnetum gibbae, the Lemnetum minoris or, more locally, the richer Spirodela- Hydrocharis vegetation. In Broadland dykes, stands of C. platycarpa occur in some abundance among the Hydrocharis-Stratiotes community. Where the muddy margins of such open waters are periodically exposed, C. stagnalis vegetation can persist for some considerable time on the moist ground, often with scattered thalli of the duckweeds, and sparse patches of such mixtures can survive long in the shade of invading emergents. Most commonly, around these stiller, eutrophic waters, it is communities like the Phragmitetum, the Glycerietum maximae, the Typhetum latifoliae and the Sparganietum erecti that colonise the transitions, with various kinds of Glycerio-Sparganion vegetation, patchily dominated by such plants as Nas turtium officinale, Apium nodiflorum, Veronica becca- https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press82 Aquatic communities bunga and smaller Glyceria spp., along the disturbed edges of dykes and streams. It is this latter kind of vegetation that usually provides a marginal fringe to stands of the C. stagnalis community in the middle and upper reaches of its Chalk stream habitat. Where there is a perennial water flow, the starworts can be very prominent in a band up to 1 m wide along the edge of a stream, mixed in with floating shoots of the Glycerio-Sparganion herbs. Submerged clumps of the community can extend into the deeper waters of the stream centre, but their cover is usually of minor importance compared with the luxuriant crowfoot vegetation that typically dominates that zone. Ranunculus penicillatus ssp. pseudofluitans is particularly important in such reaches, but R. aquatilis and R. peltatus also occur, and indeed it is these latter species which generally extend higher into the summer-dry reaches of the streams where, together with the C. stagnalis community, they form the bulk of the cover on the dampest ground of the bed (Haslam 1978). In the fast-flowing, acidic and impoverished waters of streams in the upland fringes, the vegetation patterns look very different. Here again, the C. stagnalis community becomes more obvious in the upper reaches, but its usual companions are assemblages like the Pota- mogeton-M. alterniflorum vegetation or, in swifter streams, the Myriophyllum community. Glycerio-Sparganion vegetation can occur, often rather fragmentarily, along the banks or patches of the Sparganietum erecti or the Phalaridetum, or there can be just slumped slabs of the surrounding pasture, with more moisture tolerant herbs showing locally luxuriant growth. Where peaty waters drain in, or where there is a transition to bog soakways, the C. stagnalis community often passes to Potamogeton-Ranunculus vegetation in which starworts can retain an occasional presence, though in associated dystrophic pools, there is usually a sharp switch to Juncus bulbosus vegetation. In the swiftest reaches of mountain streams, the C. stagnalis community maintains only a sparse presence in slacker byways, and is finally replaced entirely by submerged moss-dominated vegetation. Distribution "