"a17","Zonation and succession R. penicillatus ssp. pseudofluitans vegetation is sometimes found dominating whole stretches of streams and rivers to the virtual exclusion of other aquatics, but often it occurs with other assemblages of submerged and floating-leaved plants in patterns related to the speed of flow and trophic state of the waters. Zonations along and across Chalk streams are especially distinctive with seasonality of flow becoming important in the upper reaches. Where this kind of vegetation extends into slacker waters it shows some overlap in its occurrence with Elodea canadensis stands and the Ceratophylletum demersi, the former like the crowfoot tending to be most prominent in early summer, the latter becoming more abundant later in the season. There can also be considerable differences in the proportions of the communities from season to season (Butcher 1933). With increase in the trophic state of the waters and a shift to finer sediments, as happens in moving downstream, it is vegetation of this kind that eventually replaces the R. penicillatus ssp. pseudofluitans, or there may be a switch to richer Potamogeton-M . spicatum vegetation, a pat tern well seen with the move to clay substrates in the lower reaches of some Chalk streams. The Nuphar lutea community can also become prominent over crowfoot stands as such quieter, richer waters are reached. Callitriche stagnalis stands are common, too, in shal lower or sheltered places in these stretches but it is in the higher, faster reaches that this vegetation becomes really abundant in Chalk streams, forming a zone along the water margins either side of a central strip often dominated by R. penicillatus ssp. pseudofluitans, but with locally prominent Ranunculetum aquatilis and Ranunculetum peltati. Patches of herbs like Berula erecta and Apium nodiflorum can be abundant among the sub merged crowfoots, particularly as these lose their vigour later in the season, and they often thicken up in shal lower margins, together with Nasturtium officinale, to form a semi-emergent band of Glycerio-Sparganion vegetation, with occasional clumps of Sparganietum erecti swamp. Higher still, where summer flow becomes sporadic or non-existent, R. pencillatus ssp. pseudofluitans tends to yield dominance in the central zone to the Ranunculetum aquatilis and Ranunculetum peltati with patches of Callitriche vegetation, and the Glycerio- Sparganion herbs may extend in irregular fashion over much of the stream bed. R. penicillatus ssp. pseudofluitans is only rarely represented in the aquatic assemblages of more base-poor streams and rivers where Callitriche and Myriophyllum alterniflorum vegetation are the major elements in faster reaches, but ssp. penicillatus (Webster 1988) is locally found there, and further sampling is needed through western England and Wales to establish the character of its stands (Newbold & Palmer 1979, Holmes 1983). Distribution "