"a19","Zonation and succession The Ranunculetum aquatilis can be found with various other kinds of submerged aquatic vegetation, and sometimes with floating-leaved communities, the mosaics and zonations being influenced by the depth and speed of the waters and the character of the substrates. To wards water margins, transitions to Glycerio-Sparganion vegetation or certain types of swamp are usual, and taller emergents eventually overwhelm the community where they are invading shallower waters. Often, how ever, turbulence or fluctuation of the waters, or disturbance of the margins, helps maintain the Ranunculetum aquatilis as a more or less permanent feature. In faster-moving shallows, the community may be the major element among the submerged vegetation of coarser sands and gravelly beds, or occur with patches of the Callitriche stagnalis vegetation. In more base-poor streams, such as are found through the upland fringes of the north and west, the Myriophyllum alterniflorum community can also figure, these two kinds of vege tation generally extending much further into the torrential and spatey reaches upstream. In deeper waters with stable, stony beds, the Ranunculetum aquatilis can give way to the Ranunculetum fluitantis, and this vegetation may replace it entirely in wider stretches of river downstream, where the substrate consists of consolidated pebbles and boulders. Slacker reaches, with some deposition of finer mineral material, can have stands of the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum community and floatingleaved Nuphar lutea or Potamogeton natans vegetation. Along the water margins, there are often fragments of Glycerio-Sparganion assemblages or Phalaridetum swamp. In more calcareous, swift-flowing waters, notably in Chalk streams, the Ranunculetum aquatilis is not usually so abundant as the Ranunculetum peltati (Haslam 1978), but both these vegetation types comprise an important element in the stream beds of the upper reaches, often mixed with Callitriche stagnalis stands, and generally bordered or interrupted by clumps of Glycerio-Sparganion communities. The ability of the two crowfoot assemblages to withstand the late-summer drying-up of these streams gives them an important competitive advantage against Ranunculus penicillatus ssp. pseudofluitans, though this becomes increasingly important with the move downstream into reaches that have perennial flow. With the shift into the more eutrophic stretches of these streams, where there is often much clay amongst the substrate, and where vegetation like the Potamogeton-M. spicatum community can become important, these crowfoot communities generally disappear. In the shallows of sluggish and standing waters of quite high fertility, the Ranunculetum aquatilis can maintain a presence, though it sometimes assumes a frail, floating form and often makes but a small contribution among luxuriant stands of submerged vegetation like the Elodea canadensis, Ceratophyllum demersum and Potamogeton pectinatus communities. However, fluc tuation in such waters or disturbance of the margins can favour its persistence and, around the margins of such pools and dykes, it often occurs in patchy mosaics with Callitriche stagnalis vegetation, sparse duckweed mats, Glycerio-Sparganion herbs and Sparganietum erecti swamp. In these situations, succession is repeatedly set back, but where more slow-moving waters are prone to invasion by emergents, the Ranunculetum aquatilis is quickly shaded out in dense covers. Distribution "