"a2","Zonation and succession The Lemnetum minoris is most often seen as floating vegetation beyond or among the marginal swamps of still, mesotrophic to eutrophic open waters. It can be the only kind of aquatic community in the early stages of colonisation, but is frequently found with other floating or submerged macrophyte vegetation and can persist in surface mosaics and among encroaching emergents, even under the canopy of developing swampy woodland. In more disturbed habitats^ it can recover quickly when periods of sluggish flow recur, and it can take brief advantage of temporarily wet conditions in much cur tailed successions. In polluted waters, where more sensitive aquatic vegetation does not succeed it, the Lemnetum minoris may become a more persistent feature. Fragmentary covers of this vegetation can develop after rain along rutted pathways and on trampled ground, and indeed more terrestrial stands of the Riccia- Ricciocarpus sub-community can be a rather striking feature of such habitats. In such situations, though, as in temporary water bodies of larger size, streams which have only intermittent periods of sluggish flow, and ditches which are regularly cleaned out, the Lemnetum minoris remains a sporadic or ephemeral vegetation type. Here, the zonation often comprises at most a patchy mat of duckweed among Glycerio-Sparganion water-margin communities, with clumps of species such as Glyceria fluitans, Nasturtium officinale, Apium nodif- lorum and Callitriche stagnalis, or more persistent patches of the Sparganietum erecti, Acoretum calami, Typhetum latifoliae, the Glycerietum maximae or Sagit- taria vegetation. In more permanent and undisturbed water bodies, the Lemnetum minoris can be found persisting among the emergent shoots of swamp communities like the Phrag- mitetum, the Glycerietum maximae, the Caricetum pani- culatae and the Caricetum acutiformis, advancing in active succession. And where conditions are more shel tered it can extend out to form an integral part of the aquatic assemblages they are replacing, the L. trisulca sub-community being sometimes found in depths of 2-3 m where the waters are clear. Other richer duckweed vegetation of the Spirodela-Hydrocharis community can occur with the Lemnetum minoris or it may be succeeded by the Hydrocharis-Stratiotes community, or floatingleaved vegetation with Potamogeton natans, Polygonum amphibium or Nymphaea alba. Beneath the duckweed mat, there can be stands of the Elodea canadensis community, the Ceratophyllum demersi, the Ceratophyl- lum submersi and various fine-leaved Potamogeton vegetation. Polluted waters may have a more permanent cover of Typical Lemnetum minoris, although in such conditions the community is often replaced by the Lemnetum gibbae. Distribution "