"a20","Zonation and succession The Ranunculetum peltati occurs with a variety of other communities of submerged, floating-leaved and floating aquatics, the vegetation patterns reflecting differences in depth and speed of the waters, and the character of the substrate. Around water margins, zonations to Gly- cerio-Sparganion herbs or some sorts of swamp are very common, and where colonisation by emergents is advancing, the Ranunculetum peltati is quickly over whelmed. In many cases, however, fluctuations of the waters or disturbance of the water ’s edge helps maintain it more permanently. In more fertile standing or sluggish waters, the Ranunculetum peltati is sometimes found as a fragile, free- floating plant of insignificant cover, but occasionally denser clumps occur among such submerged vegetation as the Elodea canadensis or Ceratophyllum demersum communities, with stands of Nuphar, Potamogeton natans or Polygonum amphibium, and patches of the Lemnetum minoris or richer Spirodela-Hydrocharis vegetation. In such situations, patches or strips of Glycerio-Sparganion herbs, such as Nasturtium officinale, Apium nodiflorum, Veronica beccabunga and smaller Glyceria spp., or emergents like Sparganium erectum and Typha latifolia, are found along the water margins and the Ranunculetum peltati can persist on moist ground among these where the herbage is kept low and open through trampling by stock, sometimes with Callitriche stagnalis stands. Patterns of this kind can persist in the shallower, slacker reaches of larger lowland rivers, provided these are not too fertile, but the community makes a more important contribution to the vegetation patterns of running waters where moderate fertility, base-richness and summer drying are combined in the upper stretches of Chalk streams. In such situations, the Ranunculetum peltati, sometimes with the Ranunculetum aquatilis, and often with Callitriche stagnalis vegetation, occupies the bulk of the stream bed, generally with small patches of Glycerio-Sparganion herbs included in the central zone, and thickening up marginally to form a bounding strip. These become especially prominent later in the growing season, as the crowfoot cover fades, and towards the very head of the streams they often occlude the crowfoot zone altogether. However, the tolerance of some desiccation by both the Ranunculetum peltati and the Ranunculetum aquatilis gives them an important competitive edge against the Ranunculus penicillatus ssp. pseudofluitans community for most of the summer-dry reaches and, it is not until the flow remains permanent downstream, that this vegetation takes over from the Ranunculetum peltati as the major cover of the bed.In the quite fast-flowing waters of streams through the upland fringes, the Ranunculetum peltati is sometimes found as a minor element among the Myriophyllum alterniflorum and Callitriche stagnalis communities, but the Ranunculetum aquatilis seems to be more common in such habitats. Distribution "