"a21","Zonation and succession The Ranunculetum baudotii is usually found with a number of other communities of aquatics adapted to the brackish environment, often with transitions along drainage systems where there are shifts to more or less saline conditions. Distinctive kinds of swamp or wet grassland vegetation commonly occur in close association with the community and, where silting is progressive, emergents eventually shade out the crowfoot. Fre quently, however, the clearing or dredging of dykes, or disturbance by stock, helps maintain the Ranunculetum baudotii as a more or less permanent feature. Other assemblages occurring with the community in https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.025 Published online by Cambridge University PressA21 Ranunculetum baudotii community 93 standing or sluggish waters of a brackish character, are the Ceratophylletum submersi and the Potamogeton pectinatus vegetation. In the former, R. baudotii can remain very frequent, but C. submersum becomes obviously dominant; in the latter, the P. pectinatus is usually overwhelmingly abundant, with R. baudotii rather scarce. Richer Potamogeton-M. spicatum vege tation can also be found, and all three of these associated communities often continue into fresher waters of dyke systems where the Ranunculetum baudotii becomes rare. There, too, other aquatics may increase in prominence, with stands of Elodea canadensis vegetation and the Ceratophylletum demersi frequently making a contribution. Floating mats of the Lemnetum minoris or the Lemnetum gibbae also become more abundant in these fresher conditions. Towards the opposite extreme, where the waters become more saline, the Ranunculetum baudotii is quite often replaced by the Ruppietum maritimae, where R. baudotii, Zannichellia and P. pectinatus can all remain fairly frequent, but where Ruppia maritima becomes dominant, or, locally in south-east England, R. spiralis. Such gradients can be seen in the seaward end of marsh Figure 7. Generalised zonation across a brackish ditch. MG 12 Potentillo-Festucetum grassland A6 Ceratophylletum submersi community S20 Scirpetum tabernaemontani swamp A2 1 Ranunculetum baudotii community MG 13 Alopecurus-Agrostis grassland MGI 1 Festuca-Agrostis-Potentilla grassland dyke systems, where streams debouch on to salt marshes and, rather strikingly, at the head of some sea lochs on the north-west coast of Scotland. In this part of Britain, too, certain machair lochs with some maritime influence can provide a suitable habitat for the Ranunculetum baudotii, growing in and around the associated streams and the lake shallows. Hippuris is often prominent in such situations, too, and both this and R. baudotii continue to make a frequent contribution to the Potamogeton filiformis sub-community of the Potamo- geton-M. spicatum vegetation that occurs on the shellsand beds of the shallower loch margins. In its characteristic marsh dyke habitat the margins of the brackish waters frequently have stands of the Scirpetum maritimi or the Scirpetum tabernaemontani, the Phragmitetum or, where banks shelve, the Agrostis- Alopecurus grassland, the shoots of which can trail out into the waters. Where emergents colonise densely, they may crowd out the Ranunculetum baudotii, but dyke clearance often repeatedly sets back any tendency to succession. Trampled dyke or pool margins may have fragmentary patches of the Ranunculetum and Agrostis- Alopecurus vegetation among clumps of the Potentillo- Festucetum and Festuca-Agrostis-Potentilla grasslands (Figure 7). Distribution "