"a22","Zonation and succession The Littorella-Lobelia community is a common element in the very characteristic zonations that are found in less fertile stretches of standing waters, the proportions and dispositions of the various vegetation types reflecting differences in water depth, turbulence and the character of the substrates. In more exposed and oligotrophic situations, the community is a more or less permanent feature in successions that are held in check by the harsh environmental conditions but, where accumulation of silt or organic detritus is able to proceed, this kind of vegetation is replaced by other aquatic communities or swamp. Quite often, both sub-communities of the Littorella- Lobelia vegetation occur together, the Littorella type occupying more shallow or turbulent waters, the M. alterniflorum sub-community replacing it with increasing depth or shelter, moving away from the shore or shifting round to less exposed aspects. Where more or less stony substrates run on into even deeper water in upland lakes, where neither Littorella nor L. dortmanna can maintain a vigorous presence, the community often gives way to Isoetes vegetation, the quillworts assuming dominance and extending as sometimes pure swards to several metres depth beneath the lower limit of the Littorella-Lobelia community (Gay 1863, Pearsall 1921, Spence 1964). In lakes which are not quite so infertile, however, or where there are local areas of shelter and deposition of finer mineral material within the waters, the Littorella- Lobelia swards can give way to other communities of submerged aquatics able to take advantage of the enriched conditions (Figure 8). Where there are banks of silt along lee shores, for example, or in somewhat deeper waters beyond the wave-disturbed zone or where cur rents from incoming steams drop suspended, this kind of vegetation is often replaced by the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum community. There, both Littorella and M. alterniflorum remain very frequent, but dominance com monly passes to pondweeds such as Potamogeton perfoliatus, P. gramineus, P. berchtoldii, P. obtusifolius or P. pusillus. Dense stands of M. alterniflorum can punctuate such patterns, often where there is a slight local increase in turbulence over sandier substrates, and there can be floating-leaved Nymphaeetum albae and Potamogeton natans vegetation with the shift to more sheltered and deeper waters. The zonations described from Cumbrian lakes by Pearsall (1918, 1921) show such variations clearly. In more base-rich, calcareous waters, the Littorella- Lobelia community often maintains a presence in the more wave-torn shallows, giving way in analagous zonations to those described above to the Potamogeton- M. spicatum community, sometimes with P. pectinatus stands and floating-leaved Nuphar lutea vegetation. Increased eutrophication of lakes with these kinds of patterns has seen an increase in recent years in the amounts of Elodea canadensis and E. nuttallii among such assemblages. Towards the opposite extreme, where waters become more peaty and dystrophic, as where lakes occur among or receive drainage waters from stretches of blanket mire, a common feature in Shetland and along parts of the north-west Scottish seaboard, the Littorella-Lobelia community can give way in sheltered shallows to the Juncus bulbosus vegetation. Sometimes this can be found suspended over sparse Littorella-Lobelia swards in peat bound embayments with stony beds, but it is J. bulbosus and M. alterniflorum which provide the strongest continuity between the vegetation types, with species such as Potamogeton polygonifolius, Utricularia vulgaris and Sphagnum auriculatum becoming more abundant where there is a real shift in the character of the habitat (Spence 1964). In the striking machair lochs on South Uist and at a few localities on the nearby Scottish mainland, the Littorella-Lobelia community can be found in the same water bodies as both dystrophic vegetation of this kind and basiphilous pondweed assemblages on calcareous shell-sand (Ratcliffe 1977). Where exposure restricts the accumulation of silt or organic detritus, the extent of Littorella-Lobelia stands can remain unchanged for decades (Spence 1964), but more sheltered and shallow waters are always prone to invasion by emergents. Eleocharis palustris and, more locally, E. multicaulis seem especially common as col-https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.026 Published online by Cambridge University PressA22a Littorella-Lobelia community, Littorella sub community in exposed stony shallows A23 Isoetes lacustris community in deeper waters with stony bed A22b Littorella-Lobelia community, Myriophyllum sub-commùnity on coarse sand towards sheltered bay A22b Figure 8. Generalised zonation of aquatic vegetation around the margins of an upland lake.Al3 Potamogeton perfoliatus-Myriophyllum alterniflorum community on silt in sheltered bay A9 Fragmentary Potamogeton natans vegetation in sheltered bay A24 Juncus bulbosus community on sand bar off sheltered bay https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.026 Published online by Cambridge University PressA22 Littorella uniflor a-Lobelia dortmanna community 99 onisers of more gravelly shores that are not too wave- disturbed and, around Scottish lakes, zonations to stands of the Littorella sub-community of the Eleocharitetum palustris are frequent. Carex rostrata and Equise- tum fluviatile occur widely, too, extending into deeper water and being especially likely to gain a hold where there is accumulation of peaty material. Then, the Littorella-Lobelia community can give way to stretches of the Caricetum rostratae or Equisetum swamps from denser stands of which the smaller herbs are quickly crowded out. Where more silty material builds up, the Phragmitetum may replace the Littorella-Lobelia swards (Pearsall 1918, 1921, Spence 1964). Distribution "