"a23","Zonation and succession The Isoetes community typically occurs at the limit of vascular plant colonisation on the stony beds of infertile lakes, petering out where light attenuation becomes limiting and giving way to other kinds of aquatic vegetation with changes in depth of the waters and the character of the substrates. In the generally barren conditions favoured by the quillworts, these swards can be a more or less permanent feature, but any tendency to silting or accumulation of organic detritus leads to their replacement by other communities. Very often, where there is a continuous stretch of sandy or gravelly substrates from the shallows to deeper parts of oligotrophic waters, stands of Isoetes replace the Littorella-Lobelia vegetation in moving away from the shore. Transitions between the communities can be gradual, scattered rosettes of the quillworts making an occasional appearance in the Myriophyllum type of Littorella-Lobelia sward characteristic of deeper, stiller waters. Littorella and Lobelia can also extend some way, as a usually sparse cover, into the upper edges of the Isoetes stands, with M. alterniflorum and J. bulbosus remaining locally prominent too. The absolute depth of the switch from one vegetation type to the other varies somewhat with the amount of turbulence and the pat terns are quite often complicated where there is any tendency to deposition of finer mineral material in the less turbulent waters below the more wave-disturbed area along the shore. Where this occurs, with banks of sand being laid down among stretches of gravel and boulders, stands of the Utricularia sub-community of Juncus bulbosus vegetation can occur among the Isoetes swards of moderately deep waters. Then, where richer silts accumulate in such places, there can be transitions to the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum community (Figure 8). Boundaries tend to be quite sharp in these situations, but scattered quillworts can remain among the pondweed stands, and Littorella and M. alterniflorum are constant there, the latter often with high cover. Generally, though, Potamogeton spp. become much more prominent, with P. perfoliatus, P. gramineus, P. berchtoldii, P. obtusifolius and, in shallower waters, P. pusillus showing patchy abundance. Some kinds of floating-leaved aquatics can also root in these silted areas, notably P. natans and, more locally, Nymphaea alba, their foliage sometimes trailing out to form an open canopy over Isoetes stands in deeper water. Various patterns of these kinds can be seen in the vegetation maps from Cumbrian lakes in Pearsall (1918, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.027 Published online by Cambridge University PressA23 Isoetes lacustris)setacea community 103 1921) and in the zonation diagrams of Spence (1964) from Scottish sites. Greater diversity than this among aquatic assemblages in the same waters as Isoetes vegetation is generally limited to those lakes where there are sharp con trasts in shelter and substrates, as on opposed shores or where there is deposition around input streams, and even then there is limited contact between the quillwort stands and the more mesophytic communities. In more stable lake systems, the boundaries betwen the vege tation may remain fixed for very considerable periods of time but, if silting should transgress on to Isoetes vegetation, the quillwort plants are quickly over whelmed because they cannot adjust their rooting level (Pearsall 1921). Then, with increased competition from other colonisers, the swards may be replaced by something like the Potamogeton-M. alterniflorum. Even where substrates are less barren, much Isoetes vegetation occurs in waters too deep for direct invasion by emergents. In some places, however, the Scirpetum lacustris can be found sparsely represented among quillwort stands at moderate depth (Spence 1964) and, in stony shallows, transitions to Littorella-Lobelia vege tation may be locally complicated by the occurrence of the Eleocharitetum palustris. Where there is a shift to more peaty substrates in moderately deep waters, the Caricetum rostratae or Equisetetum fluviatile can be found inshore from Isoetes stands. Distribution "