"a24","Zonation and succession The Juncus community occurs with other kinds of submerged and floating-leaved aquatic vegetation in lakes and with bog pool and soakway assemblages on mifes. Emergents are sometimes found in association with the community but, in such infertile systems, these do not generally indicate any progression to swamp. Very often, the Utricularia sub-community occurs among the zonations from Littorella-Lobelia vegetation to Isoetes swards in moderately shallow water, where there is no turbulence and some deposition of slightly finer and less impoverished sand among the gravel and boulders. Such banks are sometimes seen a little way offshore, just beyond the wave-torn zone, or near the mouths of input streams (Pearsall 1921) and are usually well marked by the increase in the abundance of J. bulbosus, sometimes with M. alterniflorum, and the greater prominence of Utricularia and Sparganium spp., the small rosette plants of the Littorelletalia vegetation being largely overwhelmed by the deposited mineral material. Patches of finer and more fertile silt in these base-poor waters usually see a shift to the Potamogeton- M. alterniflorum community and, though J. bulbosus, Utricularia and Sparganium spp. can remain occasional there, dominance is generally shared between M. alterniflorum and various Potamogeton spp. which figure only infrequently in the Juncus community (Pearsall 1921, Spence 1964). Quite commonly, in these sequences, the associated Potamogeton natans in the Juncus stands thickens up to form covers of floating-leaved vegetation, and there may also be patches of the Nymphaeetum albae. Sparse Scirpetum lacustris is also frequently found growing up through the Utricularia sub-community: indeed, Spence (1964) found this swamp to be a good indicator of the presence of the aquatic vegetation beneath in a number of Scottish lakes. The Sphagnum sub-community can sometimes be found in zonations in lake shallows, replacing the Utri cularia type where the waters are sheltered and the substrates peaty. Then, there can be transitions to Potamogeton-Ranunculus soakway vegetation where https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.028 Published online by Cambridge University Press106 Aquatic communities waters trickle in from adjacent stretches of mire. Often, however, the Sphagnum sub-community occurs in small bog pools, where it may be the only aquatic vegetation apart from Sphagnum auriculatum stands, these generally overwhelmingly dominated by the moss, with just occasional J. bulbosus and Utricularia spp. and species like Menyanthes trifoliata and Eriophorum angustifolium appearing frequently. Carex rostrata is usually the com monest emergent in such waters and it may thicken up its cover locally among Juncus bulbosus vegetation. Distribution "