"a7","Zonation and succession The Nymphaeetum often occurs towards the limit of the zone of floating-leaved vegetation in open waters, sometimes comprising the only member of this element, or being accompanied by other floating-leaved or floating communities. Submerged aquatic vegetation can occur beneath it where the shading effect of the leaf laminae is not too intense, and the community sometimes persists among more open stands of emergents colonising the margins of open waters. In more mesotrophic lakes and pools in lowland Britain, the Nymphaeetum can monopolise the water surface, or occur intermixed with remnants of a floating mat of the Lemnetum minoris or, much more locally, of the Spirodela-Hydrocharis community, persisting from an earlier stage in colonisation. Sometimes, too, there can be a mosaic with patches of the Potamogeton natans community, another floating-leaved vegetation type able to extend into deeper water. Then, beneath, there is occasionally some Elodea canadensis vegetation, though this is more often associated with the Nuphar community. Even in deeper places, emergents can begin to colonise waters with the Nymphaeetum, and it is quite often seen growing among the shoots of the Scirpetum lacustris or, in shallower areas, among open stands of the Typhetum angustifoliae, the Typhetum latifoliae or the Phragmitetum. Denser zones of these swamps or, in other places, of the Caricetum ripariae, can then replace the aquatic vegetation around the water margins. In open waters towards the north and west, surface mats of duckweeds are scarce and the Nymphaeetum, sometimes mixed with the Potamogeton natans community, is often the only aquatic vegetation breaking the surface. In less nutrient-poor lakes, the Elodea canadensis community can again be present beneath or, more locally, the Potamogeton perfoliatus-Myriophyllum alterniflorum vegetation. The species-poor M. alterniflorum community can also grow under the Nymphaeetum canopy in more oligotrophic lakes and pools, but quite a common pattern in such situations is for the water-lily vegetation, often the Juncus-Potamogeton sub-community, to grow through some kind of Littor- ella-Lobelia sward. Emergent stands of the Scirpetum lacustris can complicate such zonations, even in quite deep water, and this kind of Nymphaeetum often extends back into shallower places, where other swamp communities, notably the Caricetum rostratae and the Equisete- tum fluviatile, are colonising the margins. Where the Juncus-Potamogeton sub-community occurs in peaty pools and bog soakways, it is often found in association with the Juncus bulbosus community. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.011 Published online by Cambridge University PressA7 Nymphaeetum albae community 47 In more nutrient-rich waters, the Nymphaeetum should eventually be succeeded by some kind of Phrag- mitetalia swamp, but the kinds of zonations seen in more oligotrophic open-water transitions seem to change little over many decades and cannot really be said to represent a simple hydrosere. Distribution "