"a8","Zonation and succession Even more so than the Nymphaeetum, the Nuphar community occurs towards the outer limit of floatingleaved vegetation in British waters, sometimes with remnants of free-floating communities, or alone or with stands of other floating-leaved aquatics. Beneath, there can be assemblages of submerged plants, free-floating or rooted, and the community sometimes persists towards the outer fringe of more open or patchy stands of emergents colonising the water margins. In the more eutrophic waters of which the Nuphar community is especially characteristic, it naturally develops as a successor to free-floating vegetation like the Lemnetum minoris or, more locally, the Spirodela- Hydrocharis community, and patches of these can persist, temporarily or locally, among the water-lily leaves as they come to assert dominance, or remain on the sheltered water surface in a zone landwards of the Nuphar community. Other floating-leaved communities can figure in such zonations, too, notably the Polygonum amphibium vegetation: this plant sometimes trails out into sufficiently deep water to form an element of richer Nuphar stands, but it may develop virtually pure covers behind the Nuphar vegetation or thicken up locally in mosaics of the two. Where Nymphaea alba assumes extensive dominance in waters where the two species occur together, such patterns are again best considered as mosaics of the Nuphar community and the Nymphaeetum, with just more fine-textured mixtures being included in the Nymphaea sub-community of the former vegetation type. This type of Nuphar vegetation and the Species-poor sub-community often have little in the way of associated submerged aquatic assemblages, but with the Callitriche-Zannichellia sub-community in particular there can be strong continuity with locally dense stands of such vegetation. Elodea canadensis, for example, can thicken up beneath the Nuphar community and there can be patches of Callitriche vegetation. In larger standing water bodies, the various aquatic communities can form distinct zones in relation to depth, but patterns are often much more compressed and fragmentary in narrower dykes or the more slow- moving stretches of streams and rivers. The contribution from emergent vegetation varies in these different circumstances, too. Where the Nuphar community is growing towards its depth limit, it is generally impossible for any swamp dominants to gain a hold, although the Scirpetum lacustris can survive in waters well over 1 m deep and is frequently seen among the inner fringe of the Nuphar zone or forming a belt nearing the shore. In shallower waters, the Nuphar community can be re placed by stands of a variety of emergents, in belts of the Phragmitetum, the Typhetum latifoliae, the Typhetum angustifoliae, the Caricetum paniculatae, the Glycerietum maximae or the Phalaridetum, and where terrestria- lisation is active, these can be seen as ultimately re placing the aquatic vegetation. Across narrow dykes and small streams, zonations are less well marked, clumps of various of these swamp communities occurring in the shallows along the length of the water-body, sometimes alternating with stretches of open water where there is advanced overgrowth. In such circumstances, too, the Nuphar community can be closely associated with various kinds of Glycerio-Sparganion water-margin vegetation, in which such plants as Apium, Veronica beccabunga and smaller Glyceria spp. can trail out into the water. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressA8 Nuphar lutea community 51 Where the Nuphar community extends into northern and western Britain, it can sometimes be found, in more eutrophic waters, in patterns which preserve this general character, occurring with the Polygonum community, over stands of Elodea vegetation, in lakes and pools, and giving way landwards to the Scirpetum swamp, or to the Phragmitetum or Typhetum latifoliae. Usually, in such situations, the Nuphar vegetation is represented by the Potamogeton-Juncus sub-community, and where P. natans occurs in the floating-leaved element, this can thicken up locally to form virtually pure stands that can extend out into even deeper water. Another unusual feature in some Scottish lakes is the occurrence of this kind of Nuphar vegetation over the Potamogeton per- foliatus-Myriophyllum alterniflorum community and swards of Littorella-Lobelia vegetation, a pattern more associated with the Nymphaeetum (Spence 1964). Where the Nuphar community occurs in these less eutrophic waters, the surrounding swamps, which are often of the Caricetum rostratae type, seem to encroach only very slowly, if at all. Distribution "