"a9","Zonation and succession The P. natans community can form the only floatingleaved element in sequences of aquatic vegetation, or occur with other free-floating or floating-leaved com munities, when it often occupies the deepest water. It can occur over a variety of less nutrient-demanding sub merged assemblages and, in shallower conditions, will persist among more open stands of colonising emergent vegetation. Although the Nuphar community is less tolerant of nutrient-poor conditions than the P. natans vegetation, the two can be found together in mesotrophic pools and sluggish streams, often with remnants of the Lemnetum minoris or, more locally, the Spirodela-Hydrocharis community among the floating leaves. Sometimes, too, the Polygonum amphibium community is represented in such mosaics and in narrow dykes and small ponds or where river margins have but a fragmentary fringe of floating-leaved vegetation, the different assemblages are often found as just small stands in jumbled mosaics (Tansley 1911, 1939, Butcher 1933). In other places, the vegetation can be zoned with the P. natans community in deeper water than the Nuphar stands or where there is less silting (Godwin 1923). Beneath the P. natans in these kinds of patterns, the submerged associates of the Elodea sub-community sometimes thicken up to form a stand of Elodea vegetation. Associated swamps, colonising shallower waters, but eventually overwhelming the P. natans community where terrestrialisation proceeds unhindered, are of the more mesotrophic type, with the Typhetum latifoliae, the Sparganietum erecti or various kinds of Glycerio-Sparganion assemblage frequently represented (Walker 1905). Species-poor P. natans vegetation can also be found in zonations in more oligotrophic waters of streams and lakes in north-west Britain, although here the Juncus- Myriophyllum sub-community is especially characteristic of less turbulent waters. Sometimes, the Nymphaeetum occurs with the P. natans vegetation or, where there is a little more enrichment, the Nuphar community, this latter often marking local deposition of silty material as across the mouths of inflow streams (Pearsall 1921). And, where there is a depth-related zonation, the P. natans typically extends out further than the water-lily vegetation (Spence 1964). The Juncus-Myriophyllum sub-community can be found over the Potamogeton perfoliatus-Myriophyllum alterniflorum vegetation in some places but, quite commonly, there is some kind of Littorella-Lobelia sward beneath. A variety of emergents can colonise the margins of standing water bodies with the Scirpetum lacustris often penetrating quite deeply, the Equisetetum fluviatilis and Caricetum rostra- tae occurring in shallower waters. In many lakes, terrestrialisation seems to proceed very slowly away from sites with abundant deposition of silt. Distribution "