"cg1","Zonation and succession Stands of the Festuca-Carlina grassland generally occur as relatively small islands of open, rocky vegetation within more extensive tracts of closed swards or patchworks of grassland, heath and scrub. Much of this variation is explicable in terms of an edaphic transition in moving from the limestone exposures with their often fragmentary and highly calcareous soils to areas of deeper and moister soils which, in the absence of heavy grazing, become invaded by ericoids or other shrubs. In many places, and especially where exposures of bedrock are low and much fractured, the community may cover entire outcrops. In some sites, however, the cliffs are more substantial and here the Festuca-Carlina grassland may become fragmented in the crevices and on the ledges of the rock face and give way over the more massive exposures to fern-dominated stands of the Asplénium trichomanes-Fissidens cristatus community in narrow fissures. Some of the species of the Festuca- Carlina grassland, such as certain of the pauciennials and Draba aizoides, can survive in this more chasmo- phytic vegetation. Elsewhere, on more unstable areas of bare limestone, where there is clitter and shifting accumulations of wind-blown organic and mineral detritus, there can be a transition to the more ephemeral vegetation of the Thero-Airion. On grazed sites (which are the majority), the most common transition around stands of the community is to some form of the Festuca ovina-Avenula pratensis grassland, frequently, on these warm, south-facing slopes, the Helianthemum nummularium-Filipendula vul garis variant of the Typical sub-community. As the soil cover becomes more continuous and slightly deeper (though remaining calcareous and base-rich), the sward thickens up and there is a switch to a more obviously grass-dominated turf with an increase in Mesobromion dicotyledons and a reduction in the frequency of pauciennials. Often, such junctions are marked by a strong vicarism between either H. apenninum or H. canum and H. nummularium, patterns which have been strikingly depicted by Proctor (1958). In those sub-communities where Koeleria vallesiana occurs (the Carex humilis and Trinia glauca sub-communities), there may be a similar abrupt switch to K. macrantha ’, elsewhere, this latter species runs right through the grasslands to even the most strongly parched stands of the Festuca-Carlina community. Variations in the sub-surface configuration of the limestone or local accumulations of loess or head can complicate such transitions. Then, more calcifuge com munities developed over the deeper and initially less calcareous or superficially leached and acidified soils, can occur in close contact with the Festuca-Carlina grassland. This kind of mosaic is very characteristic where the Festuca-Scilla sub-community occurs on the Gower cliffs in West Glamorgan (South Gower Coast Report 1981). In the more maritime sites, as in Gower and on Brean Down, there is the additional complexity imposed by gradients, running more or less normal to the coastline, of salt-spray deposition. Here, stands of the Festuca- Scilla and Carex humilis sub-communities may have occasional records for certain maritime species and give way towards the sea to the Festuca-Armeria grassland or directly to the crevice vegetation of the Crithmo-Spergu- larietum on sea-splashed rocks. Likewise, transitions to Thero-Airion and heath communities further up the cliffs may involve more maritime vegetation types like the Armeria-Cerastium therophyte community or the Calluna-Scilla heath. It is doubtful whether grazing is necessary to maintain the openness of the more extreme habitats of the community, where topographic and climatic conditions are probably sufficient to prevent the development of a closed sward, subsequent invasion of shrubs and the formation of a closed woody canopy. However, bird- sown seed of shrubs can germinate in rock crevices and, if grazing is relaxed on the slopes where the community occurs, stands can be encroached upon by scrub relatively quickly: thus, Proctor (1958) noted a marked change in some stands of the Scilla-Euphorbia sub community on Anstey ’s Cove in Devon in only three years following the demise of rabbits from myxomatosis. Ligustrum vulgare seems to be the most characteristic early invader, but Crataegus monogyna, Rubus frutico- sus agg. and, at some sites, the Himalayan introduction Cotoneaster microphylla, have also been recorded. In the sunny gaps within this patchy cover, tussocks of Brachypodium sylvaticum can grow up together with prominent plants of Teucrium scorodonia, Geranium sanguineum and Centaurea scabiosa with, in the shade beneath the shrubs, sprawls of Hedera helix. In time, such vegetation probably develops into the kind of wind-cut spinose scrub characteristic of many ungrazed sea cliffs. In some cases, where such scrub is encroaching more slowly from areas of deeper soil, it may grade to the Festuca-Carlina grassland through an intermediate zone of rank Avenula pubescens grassland with its characteristic mixture of Mesobromion herbs, tall grasses and dicotyledons and https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press134 Calcicolous grasslands seedling shrubs or, in more maritime situations, through the Festuca rubra-Daucus carota ssp. gummifer grassland (South Gower Coast Report 1981). Some of the chamaephytes and pauciennials of the Festuca-Carlina grassland seem to be able to persist for some time in more open areas but they are soon overwhelmed by the taller herbage. Distribution "