"cg10","Zonation and succession The community is very frequently found in zonations of vegetation types related to geological and edaphic variation and, at some localities, forms part of altitudinal sequences influenced primarily by climate. Sometimes, such patterns are complicated by serai changes mediated by grazing. The most widespread kind of edaphically-influenced zonation is found where the typically small exposures of calcareous rocks which carry this community give way to less calcareous rocks which generally make up the bulk of the surrounding landscape (Figure 23). At such junctions, there is a switch to less base-rich brown earths or, in regions of higher rainfall, to various kinds of podzol, and this is marked by transitions from the Trifolium-Luzula or Carex pulicaris-Carex panicea sub communities to less calcicolous vegetation such as the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland or various kinds of upland heath. Ordered sequences of such communities have been systematically related to variables such as calcium content and pH of the soil in the Southern Uplands (e.g. Heddle & Ogg 1936, Nicholson & Robertson 1958, King 1962) and patchworks of these vege tation types are a very common feature of many upland areas, such as north Wales (Ratcliffe 1959zz, Edgell 1969), the Lake District, the northern Pennines (Eddy et al. 1969) and on the Dalradian rocks of the east-central Highlands (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe 1977). Very often, such patterns are complicated by an overlay of drift which masks the immediate influence of the underlying bedrock and increases drainage impedence. Then grasslands dominated by such species as Nardus stricta, Juncus squarrosus or Deschampsia cespitosa and wet heaths or ombrogenous mires may be added to the mosaics. The resulting close juxtaposition of these different vegetation types over complex mountain topographies is well illustrated in the vegetation maps of the Carneddau (Ratcliffe 1959zz) and Cader Idris (Edgell 1969) in north Wales and a more straightforward pat tern has been described from the dip slopes of Carboniferous sandstones with intruded Whin Sill along Had rian ’s Wall by Lock & Rodwell (1981). Where there is flushing with base-rich waters within stands of the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, a different kind of sequence occurs. Then, the Trifolium Figure 23. Zonations of grasslands and heaths on lime-rich bedrocks with superficials. CG9b Sesleria-Galium grassland, Typical sub-community CG 10a Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, Trifolium-Luzula sub-community CGI la Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath, Typical sub-community CG 13a Dryas-Carex heath, Hieracium-Ctenidium sub-community U4a Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, Typical sub-community U4d Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, Luzula- Rhytidiadelphus sub-community U5a Nardus-Galium grassland, species-poor sub-community U5b Nardus-Galium grassland, Agrostis-Polytrichum sub-community HlOc Calluna-Erica heath, Thymus-Carex sub-community H12c Calluna- Vaccinium heath, Galium-Festuca sub-community Hl8b Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, Alchemilla- Carex sub-community https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.029 Published online by Cambridge University Press240 Calcicolous grasslands Luzula sub-community gives way to either the Carex pulicaris-Carex panicea or, with more continuous or pronounced irrigation, the Saxifraga-Ditrichum, sub community. This, in turn, may be a transition to solige- nous mire, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum dioicae, or, par ticularly in the Scottish Highlands, the Carici-Saxifra- getum aizoidis. Sometimes, both these vegetation types are involved in complex patterns around strongly- flushed sites within stands of Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland (e.g. McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Where drip ping rock outcrops intrude into the vegetation, the Saxifraga-Ditrichum sub-community may pass sharply to Cratoneurion spring vegetation or to Saxifraga- Alchemilla banks: such patterns have been well des cribed from cliffs within Dalradian schists and epidiorites (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Huntley 1979), from banks on Hoy (Prentice & Prentice 1975) and around springs on the Jurassic and Durness limestones of Skye (Birks 1973) and they occur more fragmentarily in the Lake District and Upper Teesdale (e.g. Eddy et al. 1969, Jones 1973). Where there are considerable expanses of more base rich rocks and soils in the uplands or repeated sets of exposures at progressively higher altitudes, the Festuca- Agrostis-Thymus grassland can be seen in climatically- related sequences. Essentially, it seems to be the sub montane counterpart of the dwarf-herb vegetation of the Festuca-Alchemilla-Silene community (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962) and it gives way to this vegetation at altitudes above about 750 m at certain sites in the Scottish Highlands. Frequently, such transitions also involve the Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath, which extends to somewhat higher levels than the Fes tuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland and is perhaps typical of somewhat less base-rich soils. On wetter soils, where there is more extensive flushing, greater drainage impe- dence or some effect of snow-lie, the community may give way above to montane Deschampsia-Galium grassland. The pastures within which the Festuca-Agrostis- Thymus grassland occurs are usually sufficiently heavily grazed to prevent any succession to the woodland which, in the majority of sites, would be the natural climax vegetation. It is very likely, however, that variations in such factors as the breed of stock, the social behaviour of the animals, and the palatability and seasonal availability of the herbage, play a considerable part in local differences in the grassland mosaics in which the community occurs, complicating the soil-and climate-related patterns. Changes in grazing may also mediate some successional developments between the grassland types: the spread of Nardus stricta in these swards, for example, may be encouraged by very intensive grazing, especially if it is uncontrolled (Heddle & Ogg 1936, Harris 1939) and involves more selective stock such as breeding ewes, rather than mixtures of cattle and wethers (Roberts 1959). Other unpalatable species, such as Prunella vulgaris, Cirsium spp. and bryophytes, may also increase locally with heavy graz ing (Rawes & Welch 1969) or there may be a run-down, on very heavily trampled sites, to vegetation with some resemblances to Lolio-Plantaginion communities in which Poa annua is conspicuous (e.g. Ratcliffe 1959«). Some indication of early changes with a cessation of grazing have been provided by enclosure experiments at Moor House in the northern Pennines (Welch & Rawes 1969). At this site, it was grasses, such as Festuca rubra, F. ovina, Agrostis capillaris, Deschampsia cespitosa and D. flexuosa (the last a rare grass under normal circumstances here), which showed a marked increase, at the expense of most of the important herbaceous dicotyledons of the community and the bryophytes and lichens. Despite the occasional occurrence of certain ericoids in this community, there was no development of heath vegetation in this experiment. On inaccessible ledges, it is often the increase in height and cover of tall dicotyledons which is the most noticeable response to lack of grazing, especially where such sites are kept moist by dripping water. Then Deschampsia cespitosa may also increase and the vegetation take on the appearance of tall-herb ledge communities. Transitions to this kind of vegetation have been recorded from the Welsh mountains (Ratcliffe 1959, Edgell 1969) and from Dalradian rocks in Scotland (e.g. McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Huntley 1979) where the communities approach those of the Cicerbition alpini. At lower altitudes, woody species may invade such sites, as at Craig y Ciliau in the Brecon Beacons where endemic Sorbi are a notable feature (Ratcliffe 1977). In the complex topography of the Moorfoot cleughs, Fes tuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, tall-herb vegetation and scattered trees of Sorbus aucuparia, Fraxinus excelsior and Betula pubescens occur in jumbles of vegetation on the exposed rock faces (Ferreira 1978). In such sites, it is probably the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland that is the natural development of ungrazed stands of the community. At higher altitudes and latitudes, Dryas octopetala vegetation may be another derivative of ungrazed Fes tuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Gradations to the Dry as-Silene community have been reported from ungrazed ledges on Dalradian rocks at The Cairn well (Coker 1969), Creag Mhor (Ratcliffe 1977) and Caenlochan (Huntley 1979) in the east-central Highlands and on the Durness Limestone above Inch- nadamph (Ratcliffe 1977). At lower altitudes in the north-west of Scotland, the community also occurs in close juxtaposition with Dryas-Carex heath as on the Durness Limestone on Skye, where there are also woodland fragments in a pavement landscape which https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.029 Published online by Cambridge University PressCG10 Festuca ovina-Agrostis capillaris-Thymus praecox grassland 241 resembles the karst scenery of the Pennine Carboniferous (Birks 1973). Fencing experiments on the mainland Durness Limestone should help reveal the relationships between the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland and these less heavily grazed communities (Ratcliffe 1977). Stands of the community which occur on deeper and better-drained colluvial soils on gentler slopes which are often adjacent to enclosed valley-bottom land are very susceptible to agricultural improvement by the addition of fertilisers. Although the effects of such treatment have not been followed, it is likely that the Trifolium-Luzula sub-community typical of such sites would progress to some kind of Lolio-Cynosuretum, provided grazing were maintained. Distribution "