"cg12","Zonation and succession The community occurs as part of vegetation mosaics which are related primarily to geological and edaphic variation and in altitudinal sequences which reflect climatic differences. Variation in grazing intensity is also important in influencing some zonations. Where the exposures of calcareous rocks are more restricted, as among the gneisses of the north-west Highlands and the Moine metasediments, the community occurs, sometimes as very small and fragmentary stands, in patchworks of calcicolous vegetation which provide a spectacular local enrichment on and around crags which intrude into more calcifugous communities over acidic rocks and drift. This kind of pattern is very characteristic of parts of Ben Nevis, Ben Alder and Beinn Dearg (Ratcliffe 1977). Where exposures are more extensive, notably on the Dalradian mica-schists around Breadalbane, stands are larger, sometimes of several hectares, and form a major part of considerable expanses of calcicolous vegetation in which the influence of variables such as the extent of snow-lie and the amount of flushing can be more clearly seen. In such sites this community may give way, in more sheltered positions and on cooler, north-facing slopes, to the more chionophilous vegetation of the Alchemilla alpina-Sibbaldiaprocumbens community. In other cases, and perhaps on sites where there is only a moderate influence of snow-lie but where the moist soils are somewhat less base-rich, there may be transitions to more species-rich types of Deschampsia-Galium grassland and, towards lower altitudes, Nardus-Galium or Juncus-Festuca grasslands. Where soligenous flushing becomes more pro nounced at higher altitudes, the Festuca-Alchemilla- Silene community can give way to montane Caricion davallianae mires such as the Caricetum saxatilis or the Carici-Saxifragetum and, where dripping rock faces protrude, there may be more abrupt transitions to Saxifraga-Alchemilla banks. Complex mosaics of all these vegetation types, together with soligenous mires characteristic of flushing with less base-rich waters, are a prominent feature of Ben Lawers. Here, too, where calcareous rocks extend over con siderable altitudes, there are some good sequences from the community to sub-montane vegetation types, down through the Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath to the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland or, where de creasing altitude is accompanied by some lessening of flushing with base-rich waters or increasing contamination with drift, to Nardus-Galium and Juncus-Festuca grasslands. A further, common zonation, probably mediated primarily by the intensity of grazing, occurs where the community gives way, over the inaccessible ledges and crevices of cliffs, to stands of the Dryas-Silene community and in the often fragmented transitions between the two, vegetation with intermediate floristics is often found. Distribution "