"cg13","Zonation and succession Most often, zonations involving the Dryas-Carex heath are related to edaphic variation which is dependent upon the topography and geology. The exposures of calcareous bedrocks in the north-west of Scotland, of which the Hieracium-Ctenidium sub-community is especially characteristic, are usually of limited extent and surrounded by more acid rocks. Stands of this vegetation are thus often small and they make up part of the patchworks of calcicolous communities that provide such a startling intrusion of fresh green into the dull brown cover that characterises much of this area. The outcrops are also frequently broken into cliffs, and dissected by crevices and grikes. Typically, therefore, this sub-community occurs in complex mosaics with fern-domination in crevice protorendzinas and woodland fragments in sheltered clefts and ravines. Such patterns are very well seen in the Suardal area of Skye (Birks 1973) and, to a more limited extent, around Durness (Ratcliffe 1977). At higher altitudes, on the hills above Inchnadamph, comparable mosaics involve montane chasmophytic vegetation, tall-herb communities and willow scrub (Poore & McVean 1957, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe 1977). Very often, too, the exposures, especially on flatter land at lower altitudes, are smeared with varying amounts of drift which introduces a further element of complexity. Then the Dryas-Carex heath may pass to more calcifugous heath, perhaps through an intermediate zone in which Calluna vulgaris and Nardo- Galion grasses show an increase in cover. Flushing can complicate the pattern still further. Where this is intermittent, the community may persist with scattered Cari- cion davallianae species in the sward but, where it is more pronounced, there are transitions to sub-montane soligenous mires. Where base-poor waters flow through drift-contaminated soils adjacent to Dryas-Carex heath, the community may show a sharp transition to some kind of calcifuge mire. Comparable patterns to these can be seen within and around areas of shell-sand along the north Scottish coast, where the Salix-Empetrum sub-community is more common, though here the zonations can have more diffuse boundaries because of the continuously variable thicknesses of sand that are laid down. The open chasmophytic communities of bare rock are also replaced by vegetation typical of raw sand and, with increasing proximity to the sea, there is the additional feature of maritime influence. Thus, around Inver- narver, Dryas-Carex heath occurs behind dune communities and among maritime heath, notably the Empetrum sub-community of the Calluna-Scilla heath. Disturbed areas within stands of the community may carry small patches of the Armer ia-Cerastium maritime therophyte community. Further away from the sea, where the influence of deposited sand peters out, there can be gradations to various kinds of inland heath over acidic mineral soils and peat. As before, varying degrees of flushing with waters of differing base-status result in the scattered occurrence of small-sedge mires of various kinds (Ratcliffe 1977). Both sub-communities are also frequently found in close association with small patches of sub-montane swards, such as the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland or, along the north Scottish coast, the Festuca-Plantago maritime grassland. At somewhat higher altitudes, as along the slopes of the Trotternish ridge in Skye or above Inchnadamph, it may grade to the Festuca- Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath (Birks 1973, Ratcliffe 1977). The presumption is that such zonations are mediated primarily by grazing which, when very pro longed or heavy, is supposed to wipe out the D. octopetala (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). However, the survival of the community under grazing on Skye (Birks 1973, see above), like the persistence of D. octopetala in Sesleria-Galium grassland on the Pennines, suggests that this relationship may be quite complex (Elkington 1971). Enclosure experiments at Inchnadamph may help reveal some of the answers to this problem (Ratcliffe 1977). Distribution "