"cg14","Zonation and succession Most often, zonations between the community and other vegetation types are a direct reflection of the extent of grazing, though edaphic transitions related to bed rock and soil type are also found. Very commonly, the Dryas-Silene community passes, where ledges become more accessible, to grazed calcicolous vegetation over the more intact soils of the sur rounding smoother topography. The communities involved in such transitions vary with altitude. Around higher crags, there is typically a zonation to the Festuca- Alchemilla-Silene community in which the representation of those Arctic-Alpines tolerant of grazing is maintained. Such mosaics are well seen towards the upper slopes of Ben Lawers, on Beinn Dearg and Ben Alder (Ratcliffe 1977) and, on Helvellyn, the very small fragments of the community survive among more extensive areas of dwarf-herb vegetation (Ratcliffe 1960, 1977). Towards lower altitudes, the community gives way to the more sub-montane vegetation of the Festuca- Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath and the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland as on the lower slopes of Ben Lawers, on Beinn Laoigh, in the Caenlochan-Clova area and on Meall Ghaordie and Beinn Iadain. It is very likely that each of these three communities has, in part, been derived by grazing from the Dryas-Silene vege tation which has been progressively restricted to the more inaccessible crags but it should be remembered that, around the margins of these exposures, there is frequently a coincidental edaphic shift to more intact and sometimes deeper soils, even though the underlying bedrock remains calcareous. It may be presumed that the frequent instability of the crag environment with its exposure to erosion by frost and wind, and the often precarious hold of the vegetation on ledges, help maintain the characteristic patchwork of plants of differing stature. For the most part, stands are at altitudes which are too high for colonisation by trees and much of this vegetation represents a climax dependent on the extreme climatic and edaphic conditions. Sometimes, however, the willows form a more intact cover, shading out many of the species of the community, and transitions to such low scrub can be seen on Meall na Samhna, Carn Gorm and Beinn Dearg (Ratcliffe 1977). Grazing-related zonations such as these can be com plicated where there are edaphic variations attributable to differences in the underlying bedrock and/or the character of percolating waters. Then, other less calcicolous vegetation types may occur in close association with the Dryas-Silene community. For example, where isolated calcareous crags intrude into areas of acid bedrocks, a common feature among the Moine and Lewisian Assemblages, Nardus-Galium, Juncus-Festuca or Deschampsia-Galium grasslands may surround stands of the community. In other cases, complexes of ledges run across geological boundaries or receive irrigation with waters of varying calcium carbonate content. Where flushing with less calcareous waters occurs, the Dryas-Silene vegetation can pass into other kinds of ungrazed tall-herb communities in which calcicoles are much more poorly represented. Such transitions are a prominent feature of parts of Ben Lawers, Beinn Laoigh, the Caenlochan-Clova area, Meall Ghaordie and Beinn Dearg (Ratcliffe 1977). Distribution "