"cg2","Zonation and succession Most of the zonations within stands of the Festuca- Avenula grassland or between the community and other vegetation types are related to topographic and soil variation or represent stages in successions mediated by treatment. Gradations between different sub-communities related to topographic modifications of climate are relatively uncommon. In some areas, the local physiography is such that even quite extensive stretches of the community are predominantly of one aspect, as along the scarps of the North and South Downs. Elsewhere, the effect of exposition is confused by variations in treatment or stands are so fragmented that they do not encompass the range of possible aspects within a single site. However, in some places, uniform treatment pre vails over rounded hills, scarp tops, circular or hemispherical ancient monuments or along the slopes of sharply-twisting valleys, and here transitions may be seen. In wetter regions, as on a very few localities on the South Downs, the Pseudoscleropodium-Prunella variant of the Cirsium-Asperula sub-community gives way, on south-facing slopes, to the Typical variant; in drier areas, such as parts of the Chiltern scarp, the Typical variant occupies north-facing slopes, passing to the Filipendula-Helianthemum variant on southerly expositions. To the west, as on hills and hill forts on the Dorset Chalk, or in the steep and narrow valleys of south-west Wiltshire, the Succisa-Leucanthemum sub-community is very characteristic of south-west aspects, grading to the Cirsium-Asperula sub-community (often the Pseudoscleropodium-Prunella variant) on north-facing slopes. Further north, there are a very few sites in the regional overlap of the Cirsium-Asperula and Dicranum sub communities where these two vegetation types pass one into the other with a change in aspect, e.g. parts of Dovedale in Derbyshire and on the Great Orme in Gwynedd. Very often, however, in all these cases, a number of discrete stands of the Festuca-Avenula grassland are needed to include this kind of variation. Some edaphic differences are probably involved in these topoclimatic patterns (e.g. Perring 1958,1959), but the effect of soil variation on zonations is much more clearly seen where sequences of profiles have developed over limestones partly overlain by different amounts and various kinds of superficial deposits. Strictly speaking, these soil sequences should not be described as catenas, because of the hybrid origin of some of the profiles (e.g. Balme 1953, Pigott 1962, Grime 19636, Bryan 1967): the sharpness of the edaphic transitions and the related vegetation patterns depend very much on the disposition of the superficial which is, in turn, related to topography. In general, however, the sequences are marked by an increase in the extent of the https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press152 Calcicolous grasslands soil cover and its depth, and a decline in the influence of the underlying calcareous bedrock on the development and character of the soils. In such situations, the Fes tuca-Avenula grassland can occur in suites of vegetation types which may run from very open calcicolous chasmophyte communities on exposed bedrock right through to heath over brown earths. As with aspect-related zonations, many such sequences have now been disturbed or disrupted by agricultural activity leaving modified remnants in dis junct array, but two kinds of intact sequences can still be seen. The first occurs where flatter limestone surfaces have an uneven cover of superficial which thins in places to shallow native rendzinas or rock exposures. Such patterns are best seen on the characteristic benches which develop on Carboniferous Limestone where the Festuca-Avenula grassland often forms a narrow zone towards their outer edges, giving way to heath further back and to some kind of open calcicolous vegetation over the rocky bench edge (rarely with pavement outside the limits of the Final Glaciation where the community is mostly found). On the western coastal exposures of the Carboniferous Limestone in the Mendips and Wales, where these rocky cliff tops are often very hot and dry, some very distinctive zonations of this kind occur with various types of Festuca-Carlina grassland grading to Festuca-Avenula grassland (often through the Filipendula-Helianthemum variant of the Cirsium-Asperula sub-community), then to Nardo-Galion grasslands and heath (e.g. Proctor 1956,1958, Shimwell 1968«, Rodwell 1974, South Gower Coast Report 1981). Sometimes, a more discontinuous cover of drift is reflected in complex mosaics of Festuca-Avenula grassland and heath (e.g. Gittins 1965«). Such patterns are rarer on the Chalk where the dip slope plateaus have been more systematically exploited for agriculture but fragments were described from Por ton Down on the Hampshire/Wiltshire border by Wells et al. (1976) where rendzinas carrying some Festuca- Avenula grassland were replaced locally by brown earths over Tertiary cappings with Nardo-Galion grasslands. At Lullington Heath in Sussex, Grubb et al. (1969) found some transitions from heath to Festuca-Avenula grassland where practice blast-bombing had blown away a cover of loess from the Chalk surface leaving a man-made rendziniform soil. (The much more complete sequences described by Watt (1940 et seq.) from the Breckland Chalk are considered under the Festuca- Hieracium-Thymus grassland.) The second and much more widespread situation occurs where soil sequences develop over the graded slopes of valley sides and the more rounded scarps of softer limestones. Here, slope rendzinas with Festuca- Avenula grassland pass, with varying degrees of abruptness at the brow-top, to drift-derived soils with Nardo- Galion grasslands and heath. The zonations described from the Derbyshire Dales (Balme 1953, Pigott 1962, Grime 1963/?, Shimwell 1968«, b) are of this kind and here, on the harder Carboniferous Limestone, the sequence may run on to screes and cliffs with a fragmentation of the Festuca-Avenula sward and its replacement by open fern-dominated or Thero-Airion vegetation on crevice protorendzinas. This element is usually lacking on the softer Chalk, although open communities do occur in those few places, as on river cliffs and in the gaps along the North and South Downs (e.g. Lousley 1950, Rose 1973), where bedrock is exposed. The basic sequence is, however, widespread in the south, although it is often truncated or fragmented by cultivation right to the scarp top and the conversion of the bulk of the dip slopes to arable (e.g. Hodgson 1967, Jarvis 1973, Cope 1976, Ratcliffe 1977, Jarvis et al. 1979). The particular sub-communities and variants of the Festuca-Avenula grassland involved in these zonations vary (largely in relation to regional and local climate) but especial interest attaches to the fact that the Holcus- Trifolium sub-community often forms a transition zone between the more calcicolous kind of Festuca-Avenula swards on the shallow rendzinas and the Nardo-Galion grasslands on the deeper brown earths. The soils under this sub-community are often contaminated with super- ficials as, for example, around deep drift deposits on plateaus or where, towards the upper parts of slopes, there is some downwash (Pigott 1962, Grime 1963/?) but, in general, they approximate to the calcareous brown earth type (‘mull rendzina ’ in the older terminology). They are deeper, moister and somewhat more mesotrophic than rendzinas and, at least towards their surface, less calcareous and of lower pH. Not only does this combination of features promote a lusher and more mesophytic kind of Festuca-Avenula grassland but it also creates conditions which allow the invasion of certain calcifuges and the development of mixed vege tation which gives way to calcifugous swards and heath over the deeper drift (e.g. Pigott 1962, Grime 1963«, b, Grubb et al. 1969, Rodwell 1974). There is some evi dence that certain of the calcifugous invaders can acidify the soils in their rhizospheres (Grubb et al. 1969, Pigott 1970«) and this may allow a progressive advance of the Nardo-Galion grassland into the Festuca-Avenula swards, though some species of the Holcus-Trifolium sub-community can persist to provide the calcicolous element in what has become known as ‘Chalk heath ’ or ‘limestone heath ’. Grazing also affects such changes because, if it is relaxed, such competitive power as the surviving calcicoles retain may be lost as the sward grows rank. Many areas showing the more subtle zonations between the Festuca-Avenula grassland and heaths, especially those on the Chalk, have been lost since the demise of rabbits in the myxomatosis epidemic (e.g. Grubb et al. 1969, Ratcliffe 1977). There is one further kind of zonation related to https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.021 Published online by Cambridge University PressCG2 Festuca ovina-Avenula pratensis grassland 153 interactions between soil and climate and that is the type of pattern which develops where Festuca-Avenula grasslands come under the influence of salt-spray on coastal limestone exposures. Maritime influence is relatively low within the community itself, partly because some limestones, like the Chalk along the Channel coast, typically form very high cliffs whose tops are out of reach of spray. Even where stands are close to the sea, the influence of high calcium levels can overwhelm the impact of small amounts of salt-deposition such that there are just very occasional records for species such as Plantago maritima and Armeria maritima in what is essentially a typical Festuca-Avenula sward. In some places, however, the community grades to more maritime vegetation with increasing salt-spray influence, as on low Chalk cliffs and on the Carboniferous Limestone of the Gower coast. The usual pattern is for the community to give way down the cliff to the Sanguisorba sub-community of the Festuca-Daucus grassland or, on ledges and slumped chunks of cliff, to the Brassica community. Both these vegetation types preserve a calcicolous element though, with the decreased accessibility to grazing stock on such sites, these transitions are often marked by a striking increase in taller herbs and tussocks of Brachypodium pinnatum. Although some small measure of serai change in the Festuca-Avenula grassland may occur in response to pedogenesis (see above), it is variation in grazing pres sure that, above all, controls successions to and from the community. Whenever grazing is increased or relaxed to any marked degree, or when there are substantial shifts in the proportions of the different grazing animals, physiognomic and floristic changes ensue. These are easy to describe in general terms, though there are relatively few detailed studies on the subject. It is the effects of grazing relaxation that are nowadays the more obvious. With the general decline in sheep pastoralism since the First World War (Shrub 1973, Smith 1980) and the catastrophic reduction in the rabbit population in the 1954/5 myxomatosis epidemic (Lock- ley 1964, Sheail 1971), extensive areas of Festuca- Avenula grassland have become rank and overgrown by scrubby woodland (e.g. Ratcliffe 1977). The early enclosure experiment on a stand of the community at Downley Bottom A (Tansley 1922, Tansley & Adamson 1925, Hope-Simpson 1941 b) and later observations (e.g. Hope-Simpson 1940Z?, Thomas 1960,1963, Wells 1967«, 1969, 1973) give some indication of the processes involved. The first general change is that the sward grows taller and more uneven. Although there is often a flush of profuse flowering among the dicotyledons in the season after grazing ceases, it is the grasses which, in the longer term, make the most pronounced vegetative response. They produce more and lusher foliage which can accumulate, after death, as a layer of resistant litter and some develop a pronounced tussock habit. The increased competition for nutrients, water and, especially perhaps, for light, then begins to induce a second kind of general alteration in the sward, this time in its floristic composition. Some of the characteristic dicotyledons of the Fes tuca-Avenula grassland are quickly overwhelmed, e.g. Hieracium pilosella, Asperula cynanchica, Poly gala spp. and the therophytes and more delicate bryophytes of patches of bare ground. Others can maintain their position for some time in the ranker herbage by producing larger rosettes which depress or grow through the grasses (e.g. Cirsium acaule, Sanguisorba minor, Plantago lanceolata} or adopting a bushier habit and sprawling over them (e.g. Thymus praecox, T. pulegioides, Hippocrepis comosa, Helianthemum nummularium, Lotus corniculatus). Even here, however, there may be some reduction in flowering and seed production. Sur viving plants may become very attenuated and eventually die and they cannot easily be replaced because there is little well-illuminated ground where seedlings can become established. As a result of these changes, the sward begins to assume the composition and structure of a different vegetation type. Where there is no rapid invasion into the ungrazed sward of shrubs and trees, the nature of the derived vegetation depends partly on which grasses gain eventual ascendance and partly on which particular kind of Festuca-Avenula grassland is involved. The two are not unrelated because certain grasses are especially characteristic of different sub-communities or variants or appear particularly suited to invade one type of sward rather than another. Floristic variation in the original sward also determines which range of dicotyledonous associates is available to respond to the abandonment of grazing and the expansion of the grasses. Of those grasses which are frequent throughout the community, Avenula pratensis and Dactylis glomerata often become prominent in these circumstances and, in the more mesophytic vegetation of the Holcus-Trifolium sub community, Holcus lanatus can increase (e.g. Norman 1957, Kydd 1964). Even the more diminutive species such as Festuca ovina, Briza media and Koeleria macrantha can remain very frequent and locally abundant in ungrazed swards. For the most part, however, it is the coarser and much more aggressive tussock grasses that now begin to make their mark and become overwhelming dominants. The most important of these, at least over the southern part of the range of the community, are Bromus erectus and Brachypodiumpinnatum. Both are present in small amounts as low-frequency occasional in the Festuca-Avenula grassland, though they are less common, especially the former, in the northern Dicranum sub-community. They can also invade recently ungrazed swards, provided there is a seed source nearby, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press154 Calcicolous grasslands although they may not be able to gain new entry into grasslands which have already grown rank. Once established, they respond strikingly to relaxation of grazing, expanding to overwhelm the neighbouring turf and converting the vegetation to communities in which each or both are dominant. The development of Bromus erectus grassland is reversible with a resumption of hard grazing and, even where this species continues to increase, the death and decay of the centres of its expanding clones may allow the reappearance of something resembling a Festuca-Avenula sward (Austin 1968tz). Brachypodium pinnatum is different. It is much less palatable and, once established, it can be extremely difficult to reduce, let alone eradicate. Even at the time of the earliest surveys (Tansley & Adamson 1925, Hope- Simpson 1940/?, 1941 b), grasslands dominated by these species were very widespread on the southern Chalk and they have continued to increase in extent since then. It is possible that some of the floristic variation within them is inherited from the original swards which they invaded. Both Bromus and Brachypodium grasslands exhibit a contrast between more calcicolous and more mesophytic types which reflects the distinction between the Cirsium-Asperula and Holcus-Trifolium sub communities of the Festuca-Avenula grassland. There is a third coarse and aggressive tussock grass which may be especially able to take advantage of the more mesotrophic conditions of which the Holcus- Trifolium sub-community is characteristic. This is Arr henatherum elatius, an occasional in these swards and a ready invader. Lack of grazing is a key factor in its expansion and it can quickly assume dominance to form an Arrhenatheretum, perhaps, in this case, of the kind included in the Centaurea nigra sub-community. It is, however, very palatable and resumption of grazing can reduce it to virtual insignificance in the sward (e.g. Thomas 1960, 1963, Wells 1969). Two further species are of importance here. Avenula pubescens is frequent in some kinds of Festuca-Avenula grassland, again more conspicuously in the more mesophytic Holcus-Trifolium sub-community but also in the Succisa-Leucanthemum sub-community, the floristics and environmental relationships of which are more complex. It, too, can increase very markedly when grazing is relaxed and some stands of grassland in which it is dominant may have developed from ungrazed Festuca-Avenula swards. Festuca rubra is a more com plex case. It is, in these data, much more uneven in its occurrence than F ovina, though it is invariably F rubra which is reported as becoming the more prominent of the two with lack of grazing. It is certainly very characteristic of some kinds of ungrazed calcicolous grassland, often in association with A. pubescens, though at some localities, like Swyncombe Down in Oxfordshire (Smith et al. 1971) and Porton Down on the Hampshire/ Wiltshire border (Wells et al. 1976), as an uncompromising dominant. Finally, and much more local in its importance, there is Brachypodium sylvaticum. This is a generally uncommon grass in Festuca-Avenula swards, assuming but patchy prominence under grazing and especially asso ciated with stands over harder limestones (like many in the Dicranum sub-community) where, incidentally, it is by no means always an indicator of former woodland. It can expand when grazing is relaxed and, being relatively unpalatable (e.g. Wells 1969), is less easily eradicated than, say, A. elatius, but it rarely forms a major component of closed, ungrazed swards over intact soils. The relationships between each of these species and the ungrazed environment, including its edaphic and climatic characteristics, are complex and little understood. Moreover, these grasses can often expand or invade together, producing a further element of com plexity in the derived communities. Also, many of the stands in which they are now dominant, either alone or in various combinations, originate not from ungrazed Festuca-Avenula swards but from much more grossly disturbed situations, as, for example, where calcicolous grassland has been ploughed and abandoned. Some of the intricacies of these relationships are examined under the descriptions of the various communities in which these species are dominant. Shrubs and trees can invade ungrazed Festuca- Avenula grassland rapidly if there are nearby seed sources, and the expansion and closure of a woody canopy may then proceed alongside or overtake changes in the herbaceous component of the vegetation (as in the Downley enclosure which was adjacent to a woodland). The most widespread early invaders seem to be Crataegus monogyna, Prunus spinosa, Rubus fruticosus agg., Rosa spp. and Ligustrum vulgare with, thinning northwards, Rhamnus catharticus and Cornus sanguinea and, around disturbed and enriched sites, Sambucus nigra. These can thicken up quite quickly to form stands of various kinds of Crataegus-Hedera scrub, the edges of which often become clothed in tangles of Clematis vitalba. A number of orchids, notably Aceras anthropophorum, Himantoglossum hircinum and the very rare Orchis militaris, are particularly associated with the ranker ungrazed Festuca-Avenula swards found around the margins of such scrub. Two much more local invaders which can form distinctive kinds of scrub are Juniperus communis ssp. communis and Buxus sempervir- ens. The further development of these communities to mixed deciduous, Fagus and Taxus woodlands is con sidered in the volume on Woodlands and Scrub. The consequences of very heavy grazing of Festuca- Avenula grasslands are now much more rarely seen than in the days of rabbit infestation between the World Wars https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.021 Published online by Cambridge University PressCG2 Festuca ovina-Avenula pratensis grassland 155 and into the 1950s when their impact became especially obvious with the decline in numbers of sheep. Then, their vociferous nibbling and scraping, their dunging and urinating on the sward and their excavations in the softer strata and superficial deposits, produced striking and very widespread effects (see, for example, plates 2 and 3 in Tansley 1939 and figure 5 in Hope-Simpson 19406). In some areas, their numbers have risen again as less virulent strains of myxomatosis have stabilised within the population. Their general effect on the Fes tuca-Avenula grassland seems to be to convert it to the kind of vegetation that is included in the Festuca- Hieracium-Thymus grassland, the community on which most of the classic studies of the effects of rabbits have been carried out (Farrow 1917, Watt 1940 etseq.). Here, there is a marked reduction in the numbers and cover of more palatable grasses, sedges and dicotyledons and a rise to prominence of certain bryophytes, notably Hypnum cupressiforme, Homalothecium lutescens and Pseudoscleropodium purum, in the more open sward. Also, with the greater disturbance, there is an increase in weedy species, not only those therophytes which are characteristic of open areas within the Festuca-Avenula grassland, but also grosser species such as Senecio jacobaea, Erigeron acer and Fragaria vesca. It was the local abundance of these, together with patches of, for example, Urtica dioica, Arctium spp., Verbascum thap- sus, Hyoscyamus niger, Atropa belladonna and Solanum dulcamara, often attaining a grand stature on the rich burrow spoil, that gave the old rabbit warrens their distinctive, and often highly peculiar, appearance (e.g. Tansley & Adamson 1925, Thomas 1960, 1963). Variations in grazing intensity in the Festuca-Avenula grassland have a very considerable impact, not only on the vegetation itself, but also on its often very characteristic invertebrate populations (e.g. Duffey 1962 ö, b, Duffey et al. 1974, Morris 1967, 1968, 1969, 1971a, b, 1973). The complex relationships between the numerous and varied species and the plants are an essential part of the Festuca-Avenula grassland environment and make themselves felt through inter-dependencies such as those involved in pollination. Many of these effects are subtle and hidden. One often very obvious impact of the invertebrate fauna on the vegetation, however, is that produced by the mound-building activities of ants, especially Lasius flavus (Thomas 1962, Grubb et al. 1969, Wells et al. m, King 1977a, b, c). The hills produced by this species are large and roughly hemispherical and they introduce an element of structural complexity into stands of the Festuca-Avenula grassland, especially on the southern Chalk, which long outlasts their occupation; indeed, the ant-hills may even outlast the grassland, persisting after the abandonment of grazing and beyond the development of a woodland cover.The soil of the ant-hills is structurally finer and less dense than that of the surrounding intact profiles, though it does not seem to be significantly different in its chemical properties. It is also more free-draining and subject to greater fluctuations of temperature, the dry ing and heating being especially marked on the southern face. The mounds are also subject to various kinds of disturbance by rabbits, which use them as latrines, and various ant-eating or dust-bathing birds. Both sheep and rabbits may graze them preferentially, especially where the surrounding vegetation has grown rank. These effects combine to produce a complex floristic mosaic within Festuca-Avenula swards which is subject to its own distinctive successional changes. In King ’s studies, the most characteristic species of the ant-hills were of two kinds: those within the immediately sur rounding sward which were more readily able to grow through or on to the accumulating soil (notably the chamaephytes Thymus praecox, Helianthemum nummularium, Cerastium fontanum and, to a lesser extent, Asperula cynanchica) and therophytes, virtually absent from the intact grassland but able to find a very congenial germination ground on the mounds (Arenaria ser- pyllifolia, Veronica arvensis). With ageing, but continued occupation, the vegetation seemed to stabilise with large amounts of T. praecox and H. nummularium but, on abandonment, other species, especially Hieracium pilosella, became conspicuous to form vegetation which appears to resemble that of the Festuca-Hieracium- Thymus grassland. Although hills produced by moles (Talpa europaea) are frequent in Festuca-Avenula grassland and may be confused with ant-hills (see King 1977a), they present a somewhat different disruption of the surface and show a less peculiar flora. Mole-holes are rapidly excavated in a single operation and are quickly eroded by rain and trampling by stock to ground-level. Their soil is not structurally sorted, being simply a disturbed pile of material, and it may contain seeds and vegetative frag ments which can readily regenerate (King 1977a). Though there may be a temporary flush of therophytes on the mound, the vegetation seems quickly to return to that of the surrounding grassland. The aesthetic appeal of Festuca-Avenula swards has long made them popular for recreation which can entail heavy trampling and sometimes the driving or parking of vehicles on the vegetation. Around picnic spots, there may also be particular kinds of cultural eutrophication. In recent years, a declining number of stands has come under increasing pressure from a growing and more mobile population and some sites, as on the North Downs (Streeter 1971, Dixon 1973) or along the north Wales coast (Rodwell 1974), have become especially vulnerable. The distinctive springy turf of the community seems https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press156 Calcicolous grasslands resilient to a certain amount of trampling but, where this is concentrated, as along paths and around viewingpoints, clear changes occur in the vegetation. In such places, there is often a local increase in resistant grasses, notably Cynosurus cristatus, but in some cases also Dactylis glomerata, Agrostis stolonifera and Holcus lanatus, and in some of the rosette species, such as Plantago lanceolata, Bellis perennis and Taraxacum officinale agg., at the expense of more sensitive plants like the chamaephytes. This gives such swards a somewhat similar composition to the Holcus-Trifolium sub community and recreational trampling may play a part in the development of some stands of this kind of Festuca-Avenula grassland. Typically, however, the sward lacks the tussocky physiognomy of this vege tation, being extremely short. Also, the further appearance in the turf of Lolium perenne, especially where there is some eutrophication, often presages a rapid move towards Lolio-Plantaginion vegetation. Very similar changes to these were observed by Perring (1967) with an increase in horse-galloping pressure on stretches of Newmarket Heath, Suffolk, used for race-horse exercising. Most unusually among Festuca-Avenula species, the rarity Pulsatilla vulgaris is actually benefited by heavy trampling, which stimulates the formation of new rosettes from deep adventitious root-buds (Wells & Barling 1971). Even where this species is present, how ever, very heavy pressure may eventually disrupt the sward, allow soil erosion and expose the bedrock. Distribution "