"cg3","Zonation and succession Zonations involving the Bromus grassland are most often reflections of serai changes related to the intensity of grazing and sometimes complicated histories of ploughing and abandonment. Occasionally, the community may show an abrupt transition to disturbed, oligotrophic soils that cannot, apparently, be invaded by B. erectus (Lloyd 1964, Lloyd & Pigott 1967). More usually, it occurs in irregular patchworks with surviving areas of Festuca-Avenula grassland, other rank swards that have developed with a demise of grazing (e.g. the Brachypodium pinnatum and Avenula pubescens grasslands) and scrub. Such patterns have been described in detail from Lullington Heath in Sussex (Grubb et al. 1969) , Barton Hills in Bedfordshire (Wells & Morris 1970) and Porton Down (Wells et al. 1976) and they are a common feature of many areas of the southern Chalk and Oolite (e.g. Ratcliffe 1977). In principle, the fact that B. erectus will be eaten by stock and rabbits means that its expansion in swards is reversible with a resumption of grazing (Hope-Simpson 1940Z?). In practice, this may be more complicated. For example, Wells (1971) showed how B. erectus maintained its cover in this kind of vegetation over shallow, rendziniform soils with quite heavy grazing, even increasing in extent on deeper loamy soils. It is therefore possible that swards may stabilise with a higher B. erectus cover and that really hard grazing, with no alternative, more palatable herbage, is necessary to effect any marked reduction. The high cost of this kind of pastoral control has focused attention on mowing as an alternative means of retaining or recovering the species-richness and diversity of those calcicolous swards where B. erectus can gain a hold. Wells (1971) demonstrated that cutting in spring, shortly after growth commenced in March, was effective in holding steady or reducing the cover of B. erectus, perhaps by depleting the newly-mobilised food reserves. Regrowth was then poor and other species were able to capitalise on the provision of space. Summer cutting sometimes encouraged the expansion of B. erectus, perhaps because of stimulating the production of tillers when growth was in full swing. Though mowing is unselective (and not always practical on very steep slopes), it can be precisely timed and this may have advantages in allowing selected species to flower and set seed (e.g. Wells 1969, 1971, 1973). Burning, though it has been more traditionally prac tised on grasslands with Brachypodium pinnatum, has sometimes been used as a means of controlling B. erectus which, in dry weather, is readily ignited with its accumulations of litter. It may not always be successful. Indeed, it may stimulate fresh growth in the cleaned sward and, though new shoots may be more eagerly eaten by stock, without grazing the B. erectus may simply resume its dominance. The subsequent successional development of Bromus grassland with the continued absence of grazing has never been followed in detail. Though stands of the community often occur in close association with scrub, we do not know how readily shrubs and trees can invade the ranker swards. Certainly, some stands, after rapid establishment following myxomatosis, seem to have https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.022 Published online by Cambridge University PressCG3 Bromus erectus grassland 169 remained substantially unchanged for 30 years. Large populations of field voles (Microtus agrestis) often become established in such litter-choked tussocky grasslands and these may play an important role in eating and barking seedlings of woody species (Smith 1980). Deli berate or accidental burning may also repeatedly set back any invasion and help maintain the vegetation as a plagioclimax. Where colonisation by B. erectus is more gradual or patchy, it is possible that shrubs and trees may become established in the more open turf or on ant hills which are often abandoned as they become increasingly shaded by the tall grasses (Wells et al. 1976, King 1977c). Distribution "