"cg4","Zonation and succession The various kinds of Brachypodium grassland, like those dominated by Bromus erectus, commonly occur in zonations which reflect serai changes related to grazing intensity, forming patchworks with Festuca-Avenula grassland, other rank swards and scrub as on the Wye and Crundale Downs in Kent (Green 1973), at Castor Hanglands on the Huntingdon/Peterborough Oolite (Duffey et al. 1974) and over the Chalk of the Yorkshire Wolds (NCC Yorkshire Chalk Grassland Survey 1985). More locally, the community occurs with more open weed vegetation and scrub on quarry spoil (e.g. Shimwell 1968«). Because of its unpalatability, the expansion of B. pinnatum seems to be reversible only with difficulty. Grazing with sheep alone, especially just in winter, is ineffective and even all year round grazing involving https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press178 Calcicolous grasslands cattle may do no more than simply restrict further spread and reduce the pronounced tussocky character of the sward (Hope-Simpson 1940Z), Green 1973). Likewise, burning alone, though cheaper than grazing, des troys accumulated litter but may not reduce the cover of B. pinnatum'. indeed, it can encourage further expansion, though twice-yearly burns in alternate years may prevent this (Green 1973). More effective seem to be combinations of these treatments, for example a burn in very early spring followed by very hard grazing, preferably by cattle first, then sheep (Hope-Simpson 19406, Green 1973). Sprinkling salt on the tussocks may encourage stock to eat the herbage (Hope-Simpson 19406). The assiduous care needed in such treatments to avoid deleterious side effects such as poaching of the soil, always a danger where cattle are grazing steeper slopes, or loss of invertebrate populations with burning, and the difficulties of integrating them with recreational use of the grasslands, makes mowing an attractive alternative. Mowing with removal of the cuttings has been shown to be effective in maintaining less tussocky and more varied Brachypodium swards and reduction in the height of the herbage may induce rabbits to graze (Green 1973). The further development of ungrazed Brachypodium grasslands has not been monitored in detail. As with Bromus erectus, the dense tussocky nature of some of the swards and the high population of voles which this encourages, may hinder scrub invasion. Though B. pinnatum is actually palatable to Microtus agrestis (Godfrey 1953, 1955, Chitty et al. 1968), it is doubtful whether voles make great inroads on the cover of the species. Distribution "