"cg6","Zonation and succession Despite the widespread decline in pasturing over the lowland limestones, large stands of the community are rare because the bulk of the most suitable soils has passed into arable cultivation. Where it does occur, this vegetation usually forms part of zonations which are both related to edaphic variation but also a reflection of serai changes mediated by grazing. The Dactylis-Briza sub-community is typically found as a narrow, patchy fringe towards the bottom of valleyside slopes or as small, isolated stands on local accumulations of colluvium or head. As the soil cover thins to more shallow, dry and oligotrophic rendzinas, it grades to more calcicolous swards. For the most part, these are various kinds of Festuca-Avenula grassland though, on the Durham Magnesian Limestone, this sub-community may pass to Sesleria-Scabiosa grassland. The more extensive stands of the Potentilla-Tragopogon sub-community at Porton occur in analogous edaphically-related zonations, grading to Festuca-Avenula swards over shallower rendzinas and on the sorted soils of occupied ant-hills. Over very oligotrophic, flint- strewn soils, especially where there has been a history of rabbit-warrening, the sub-community gives way to the Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland. The most likely immediate serai precursors of the https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press190 Calcicolous grasslands Avenulapubescens grassland are perhaps the more mesotrophic Festuca-Avenula swards, like those in the Hol cus-Trifolium and Succisa-Leucanthemum sub-communities. In more calcicolous vegetation, ant-hills may provide nuclei from which the ranker grasses can spread. Once established, the Avenula pubescens grassland can probably progress to scrub provided the sward is not so overwhelmingly dominated by a mattress-like or tus socky cover of grasses as to leave no space for seedlings to gain a hold. The less rank vegetation of the Dactylis- Briza sub-community is more likely to be invaded and species like Crataegus monogyna and Prunus spinosa sometimes gain a vigorous hold in its deep, moist soils and from there slowly advance up valley sides. Rabbits may play some part in keeping the vegetation of the Potentilla-Tragopogon sub-community in check but, even without any grazing, it seems doubtful whether the very rank swards here can be easily invaded by shrubs. They may therefore maintain themselves for very long periods with, perhaps, some measure of cyclical change as tussocks decay and the weeds come and go. At Swyncombe, Smith et a/. (1971) noted that, if Urtica dioica gained a hold on bare patches, it precipitated a very rapid breakdown of grass litter which opened the way for colonisation by more extensive areas of weed vegetation. Distribution "