"cg7","Zonation and succession Zonations between the Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland and other vegetation types generally reflect edaphic gradients or serai changes mediated by grazing. Most frequently, in soil-related sequences, the community represents the most oligotrophic extreme of a range of calcicolous communities, giving way, with varying degrees of abruptness, to more closed and mesophytic swards, over deeper, moister and richer soils. The Koeleria sub-community is the usual kind of Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland encountered in such zonations and, in moving away from the rocky knolls, cliff tops, fine talus or rock waste on which it typically occurs, it thickens up, generally to some type of Festuca-Avenula grassland or, where grazing has been relaxed, to ranker swards dominated by coarse calcicolous grasses. At Porton Down, the Cladonia sub community occurs in comparable mosaics with the Festuca-Avenula grassland, picking out patches of the poorest and most chalky and flint-strewn soils (Wells et al. 1976). Such zonations can be gradual, the deepening of the soil being reflected in a hazy shift from chamaephytes, therophytes and bryophytes (and lichens in the Cladonia sub-community) to grasses and hemicryptophytes. However, where soil impoverishment has been produced by gross disturbance, such as ploughing, vegetation boundaries are characteristically sharp: stands of the Fragaria-Erigeron sub-community, for example, can pick out the shape of an arable field long after its abandonment, passing abruptly at its margins to the usually rank swards of adjacent neglected pastures (e.g. Cornish 1954, Lloyd 1964, Lloyd & Pigott 1967). Similarly stark patterns characterise the occurrence of Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland (usually the Koe leria sub-community) on the continually-disturbed soils of occupied ant-hills (King 1977a, b). More unusually, though much more famously, the https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.026 Published online by Cambridge University PressCG7 Festuca ovina-Hieraciumpilosella-Thymus praecox! pulegioides grassland 203 community represents the most calcicolous extreme of a spectrum of oligotrophic communities, passing, over deeper and more acidic soils, to calcifugous grasslands and heaths. This is the kind of sequence first fully described by Watt (1936, 1940) from Breckland where both the Ditrichum-Diploschistes and Cladonia sub communities occur as part of the range of his ‘grassheaths ’. The former type of Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland is very much confined to the most exposed and inhospitable, flinty rendzinas, being replaced over slightly deeper and less calcareous, though still base rich, soils by the latter sub-community. This, in turn, gives way, over sandy brown earths, to Festuca-Agros- tis-Rumex grassland as calcicoles are eclipsed by calcifuges and the grass cover thickens up somewhat but, in the harsh continental climate and with (at the time of Watt ’s survey) continued heavy rabbit-grazing and mole-disturbance, the general contribution made to the vegetation by therophytes, bryophytes and lichens remains important. As Watt stressed, the actual manifestations of this sequence, and its continuation into very calcifuge vegetation over podzols, are complex and often incomplete at a single site. Moreover, even the most intact of these zonations are now much altered because of the reduction in rabbit-grazing. However, it is clear that the various kinds of Festuca- Hieracium-Thymus grassland respond rather differently to the cessation of grazing. In the more extreme types of sward, such as those of the Ditrichum-Diploschistes sub community, edaphic and climatic conditions are so harsh as to prevent the speedy development of a more intact and mesotrophic vegetation upon enclosure (Watt 1962, 1981 tz, b). Some stands of the Koeleria sub community, such as those over very rocky cliff tops, are probably similarly uncongenial to the spread of grasses and the appearance of hemicryptophytes. In other cases, as with the Fragaria-Eriger on sub-community, artificially enhanced oligotrophy seems to be so severe as to impede the formation of a more grassy sward (Lloyd 1964, Lloyd & Pigott 1967). With these vegetation types, the stabilisation of the soil surface and the accumulation of fertility is likely to be a very slow process (Watt 1981/)). The Cladonia sub-community, on the other hand, shows much more pronounced and rapid changes with enclosure, so that the vegetation comes to resemble something akin to a Festuca-Avenula sward (Watt 1957, 1962). At Porton, too, Wells et al. (1976) suggested that this might be the fate of ungrazed stands of the Cladonia sub-community. But such resemblances are likely to be temporary, because the Festuca-Avenula grassland is also dependent on grazing for its maintenance and, among herbaceous species, it is perhaps the ranker grasses which are the likelier candidates as eventual dominants after long enclosure or abandonment. Here, too, though, there may be complexities: Bromus erectus, for example, in many ways eminently suited to these more oligotrophic, calcareous soils, seems strikingly slow to invade them, perhaps because of its poor dispersal (Watt 1957, 1962, Lloyd 1964, Lloyd & Pigott 1967). Avenula pratensis may likewise be inhibited from spreading for a number of reasons not directly related to the poor nutrient content of the soils (Wells et al. 1976). Other possible colonisers, such as Avenula pubescens and Festuca rubra, though they can gain an initial hold on abandoned ant-hills, may need a considerable accumulation of fertility before they can spread extensively (Wells et al. 1976, King 1977 a, c). Even where changes in the herbaceous vegetation are fairly rapid and considerable, evidence suggests that, in some cases, they are likely to be overtaken by the invasion of those woody species which can establish themselves directly in the open and inhospitable con ditions. At Lloyd ’s Pulpit Hill Field site, for example, Cornus sanguinea was noticeably common among the Fragaria-Eriger on vegetation and he suggested that a number of features gave it an advantage over Crataegus monogyna, a very abundant early invader of Festuca- Avenula swards: high percentage viability and quick germination of the seed, indeterminate shoot growth and the ability to sucker and spread vegetatively once established (Lloyd 1964, Lloyd & Pigott 1967). C. sanguinea also occurred at Porton though, here, Juniper- us communis ssp. communis was an important coloniser of swards of the Cladonia sub-community after myxomatosis, forming open scrub (Wells et al. 1976). In Breckland, Pinus sylvestris is the most prominent woody species, seeding in from the extensive plantations nearby, and even the Ditrichum-Diploschistes vegetation would seem to be progressing to open pinewood (Watt 1957, 1962, 1974, 1981 a). Distribution "