"cg9","Zonation and succession Vegetation sequences involving the Sesleria-Galium grassland are generally related to edaphic transitions or, with some sub-communities, are a reflection of serai changes mediated by grazing. Two kinds of soil-related zonations are especially noteworthy. First, the community often forms part of a range of vegetation types which run from fragmentary communities over crevice protorendzinas on very rocky https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.028 Published online by Cambridge University Press226 Calcicolous grasslands topographies to calcifugous grasslands and heaths over deeper, drift-contaminated brown earths. Such patterns are especially well seen on the characteristic benches which alternate with cliffs on the valley sides of the Craven dales (Rodwell 1974) but they occur widely in more fragmentary form wherever there is heterogeneity in the soil cover over the limestone. In some cases, as on the warm and dry edges of exposures around Morecambe Bay, it is the Helianthemum-Asperula sub community of the Sesleria-Galium grassland itself which occurs as the most open vegetation type, giving way, further back from the cliff edges to the Typical sub community as the soil cover deepens and becomes more extensive. Inland, where the climate is cooler and damper, the Typical sub-community usually gives way, over cliff crevices and on small ledges, to some kind of fern-dominated vegetation, either Asplenion communities or, especially on screes and in deeper crevices, to stands of Gymnocarpium robertianum. In other cases, transitions to screes are marked by a gradation to various mixtures of Arrhenatherum elatius, Geranium robertianum, Brachypodium sylvaticum and Mercurialis perennis. Over pavements, fragments of the Typical sub community, or of the Carex pulicaris-Carex panicea sub-community where it occurs in solution hollows, may give way sharply to grike vegetation of which various species of the Sesleria-Galium grassland can make up an important component. On the deeper soils in such sequences, typically found some way back from cliff edges or over infilled, con cealed grikes, there is almost always some loess or boulder clay. Here, the Typical sub-community gives way, with a sharpness that is often a direct reflection of the distance to the underlying limestone or the extent of contamination of the soils with superficials, to some kind of Nardo-Galion sward, sometimes with an interposed band of the Festuca- Agrostis-Thymus grassland in which there is a gradual shift from calcicoles to calcifuges as the dominant element in the vegetation. In the drier parts of the range of the community, as over the Morecambe Bay limestones, the sequence may continue to Calluna-Erica heath over acid but still fairly dry and light-textured soils. Where there is a complex patchwork of different soils over often very uneven bedrock sur faces, these different vegetation types may occur in close proximity, forming the intimate mixtures sometimes described as ‘limestone heaths (e.g. Moss 1911, Dixon 1982). Inland and at higher altitudes, this latter part of such sequences shows a shift towards vegetation types characteristic of moister soils. The Typical sub community may be replaced here by the Carex pulicaris- Carex panicea sub-community which may pass to Nar- dus-Galium or Juncus-Festuca grasslands and then to Erico-Sphagnion ombrogenous mire. In the peculiarly extreme conditions in Upper Teesdale, such zonations tend to be telescoped so that the Carex-Kobresia sub community is restricted to ‘windows ’ within an expanse of wet heath and bog (Bradshaw & Jones 1976). The second kind of edaphically-related zonation is less common, though very distinctive. It occurs wherever there is some soligenous flushing of these grasslands, as when water percolating through the limestone hits some interbedded and less permeable stratum. In such situations, the Typical sub-community of the sur rounding slopes gives way, sometimes through a zone of the Carex pulicaris-Carex panicea sub-community, to a Caricion davallianae mire, usually of small extent. At lower altitudes, this latter vegetation is usually the Briza-Primula sub-community of the Pinguiculo- Caricetum but, in Upper Teesdale, the Carex-Juncus sub-community can figure in these sequences or, on gravelly areas near to the flush heads, the Gymnostomum sub-community. The subtle patterns which these vege tation types form, and their susceptibility to disturbance, makes them a very precious component of the upland limestone landscape. Other, less frequent, zonations involve transitions to mesotrophic grassland over deeper, moister but still moderately calcareous soils. The typical situation for such floristic shifts is towards the bottom of scree slopes where there is an accumulation of colluvium, but these are frequently obscured by the enclosure and agricultural improvement of the swards. On rare occasions, however, there may be gradations to unimproved mea dow communities like the Centaureo-Cynosuretum or, in dale heads at higher altitudes, the Anthoxanthum- Geranium grassland. In a very few localities, the Sesleria- Galium grassland passes to the Filipendulo-Arrhenatheretum on north-facing slopes where, towards the foot of cliffs, there is an absence of grazing. Although scattered wind-cut trees, such as Taxus baccata, Fraxinus excelsior and, in some sites, the endemic Sorbus lancastriensis, are a distinctive feature of crevices in the cliffs over which the Helianthemum- Asperula sub-community occurs (Proctor 1958, Clapham & Nicholson 1975), this kind of Sesleria-Galium grassland and the two montane sub-communities can be seen as climatic climax vegetation types from which the withdrawal of grazing would probably have little effect. With the Typical and Carex pulicaris-Carex panicea sub-communities, on the other hand, the soils are neither too dry nor too wet, and the climate insufficiently cold, to prevent the invasion of woody species. Stands which are inaccessible to stock show a marked increase in the grass cover, especially of S. albicans which can form virtually pure clumps but, though this species and many of the associates can persist for some time under a light woody canopy, these sub-communities are eventually replaced by scrub when grazing is https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.028 Published online by Cambridge University PressCG9 Sesleria albicans-Galium sterneri grassland 227 withdrawn. Succession has never been followed in detail but the most likely invaders would seem to be Crataegus monogyna, Prunus spinosa, Corylus avellana, Sorbus aucuparia, Fraxinus excelsior and Taxus baccata with, on drier sites, Betula pendula and, over more mesotrophic soils, Acer pseudoplat anus and Ulmus glabra. Mix tures of these species commonly occur as dense thickets on scree slopes which are ungrazed and they can expand out from grikes on inaccessible stretches of pavement. On drier and warmer slopes, the succession can be to Fraxinus-Acer-Mer cur ialis woodland but Acer cam- pestre itself, and two common invaders of grasslands on Carboniferous Limestone further south, Cornus sanguinea and Rhamnus catharticus, are very much towards their northern limit in this area and are only sparsely seen in developing or mature woodlands. On moister and cooler slopes, the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mer cur ialis woodland, the climax community on base-rich soils in the north and west of Britain, may be a more likely development. Distribution "