"h1","Zonation and succession The Calluna-Festuca heath is found with a variety of other vegetation types in zonations and mosaics which reflect patterns of edaphic variation and long and diverse treatment histories. Very often now, the neglect of traditional styles of heathland management has blurred the boundaries in such sequences and allowed serai developments previously held in check. More drastic heathland improvement has truncated and frag mented many zonations and stands of the community are frequently abruptly marked off from surrounding arable land or coniferous plantations. Even the relatively small surviving tracts of heathland in eastern England sometimes stretch over a range of soil parent materials, with either sequences of diverse solid deposits or, very often, a cover of heterogeneous drift, variable in thickness, and thus in the extent to which it masks the influence of the underlying bedrock, and in its own chemical and physical characteristics. The soil mantle is therefore often quite varied, with profiles differing in such features as base-richness, texture and permeability, even within a small compass (e.g. Watt 1936, 1940, Corbett 1973, Hodge et al. 1984). Over such sequences of soils, the Calluna-Festuca heath has become established on the more acidic and free-draining, accentuating the tendency towards podzolisation and often marked off from neighbouring vegetation types by shifts in one or more of these edaphic factors. In a few localities, soil moisture is a controlling variable, the community representing the dry-heath element in the kind of pattern so characteristic of the surrounds to southern valley mires (e.g. Rose 1953), where there is a zonation through wet heath to mire vegetation in relation to a locally high ground watertable. On some of the west Norfolk commons, at Sandringham Warren and Roydon Common, for example (Daniels & Pearson 1974, Ratcliffe 1977), the Calluna- Festuca heath occupies some of the driest of the sequence of acidic soils, passing on seasonally-waterlogged mineral profiles to the Ericetum tetralicis, which then gives way to a variety of mire communities, depending on the base-richness of the ground waters. Although Calluna maintains its frequency within the Ericetum, its vigour is usually depressed and the boundary between the two kinds of heath is generally well marked by the confinement of Erica tetralix and Molinia to the wetter ground, a restriction which reflects the continental character of the climate. Within the range of the Calluna-Festuca heath, zonations of this kind are less common than in central southern and south-west Britain and more often the prevailing kind of edaphic variation over the tracts of heathland here is in base-richness among profiles which are more or less uniformly free-draining. Such differences depend upon variations in the amount of calcareous material in the superficials and the proximity to the surface of any limy bedrocks, most importantly through much of East Anglia, the Chalk, and they are particularly influential in the Breckland mosaics of heath and grassland renowned from Watt ’s (1936,1940) accounts. Such patterns, still to be seen in whole or part on the remaining fragments of the Stanford-Wretham, Ick- lingham and Lakenheath-Elveden heaths (Ratcliffe 1977), involve transitions from the Calluna-Festuca heath, through calcifuge Nardo-Galion swards, to the Festuca-Avenula and Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grasslands, with an edaphic shift from Worlington brown sands with some podzolisation, through Methwold brown calcareous sands, to Newmarket brown rendzinas (Corbett 1973, Hodge et al. 1984). Floristic variation within the sequence is more or less continuous and, though the limit of the heath is well marked by the bounds of the dominant Calluna, fine mosaics of the community with patches of included grassland are common (though they lose much of their clarity if grazing is relaxed: see below). The degree of order within these soil and vegetation mosaics is, in fact, very vari https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.045 Published online by Cambridge University PressHl Calluna vulgaris-Festuca ovina heath 377 able, dependent as it is on the great heterogeneity of the cover of superficials, but some especially striking pat terns have resulted where the materials have undergone periglacial sorting to produce such features as polygons or stripes. These occur quite widely over the gently- undulating landscape of East Anglia and are often very clearly delineated on unimproved land, because the Calluna-Festuca heath typically picks out the areas of deeper and more acidic sandy infill, while the polygon centres or areas between the stripes are occupied by the grasslands (Williams 1964, Corbett 1973, Curtis et al. 1976) . Especially good examples of the striped kind of patterning can be seen at Eriswell High Warren, on Thetford Heath and around Grimes Graves (Ratcliffe 1977) . Two other kinds of floristic variation can confuse these soil-related patterns. These, too, have some kind of edaphic basis but they are also a reflection of competitive interactions between Calluna and two other possible dominants, Pteridium and Carex arenaria, on the dry acidic soils which the community favours, so the spatial patterns that result are often but a temporary indication of shifting successional developments. Pteridium is generally confined to deeper soils, free from parching, but toing and froing of dominance between it and Calluna is in large measure dependent upon coincidence of a vigorous, expansive phase in the one with a declining, weakly-competitive phase in the other (Watt 1955), a pattern of growth which is endogenous, though strongly influenced by external biotic or climatic factors (Watt 1971, Marrs 1986). This is why mosaics between the Calluna-Festuca heath and the Pteridum-Galium community are so diverse on the ground and variable through time. Zonations to the Carex arenaria or Carex- Cladonia dune communities are likewise related to com petition between heather and the sedge, though the greater tolerance of the latter to shifting sand often means that transitions from one vegetation type to the other reflect present or past instability of the sandy soil surface (Watt 1937). Patchworks of grassland, heath, bracken and sandsedge compose the characteristic vegetation cover of the heathlands of eastern England and were in the past maintained by the traditional burning and grazing treatments, with rabbits, long encouraged in the warrens of this region, providing a very important additional graz ing component. The burning renewed the heather at regular intervals, probably helped keep bracken in check and repeatedly set back any invasion of shrubs or trees; the grazing helped maintain the grassland against expansion of the heath, sharpening up the boundaries between them. The abandonment of these treatments and the demise of rabbits in the myxomatosis epidemic have allowed the grasslands and the heather to grow rank in many places, so that transitions between the communities have been obscured. They have also permitted serai progressions to scrub and woodland, patches of which, sometimes very dense and extensive, have become common on these heathlands. The most important woody invaders on the dry, acidic soils characterised by the Calluna-Festuca heath are Betula pen dula and the pines, of which there are now such abundant seed-parents in the plantations. Oak, often Quer eus robur over the range of the community, sometimes figures if there are mature trees fairly close at hand and locally Rhododendronponticum has become common, as at Sandringham Warren, for example. Colonisation of vigorous, dense Calluna by these species, particularly birch and pine, is very difficult but degenerate heather, experiencing no burning or grazing, offers ample open ground. Once well established, such trees can shade out the heather and most of its heathland associates and come to dominate in Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland, the climax forest of base-poor, free-draining soils in lowland Britain. Natural gaps or cleared areas within such woodland can show a temporary resurgence of the heath, though there is a strong tendency for the Pteridium-Galium community to become ensconced in such places or for Ulex-Rubus scrub to develop in disturbed areas. Gorse scrub of this kind is also sometimes found around coniferous plantations and often runs across the heathland in strips marking out the edges of trackways. Distribution "