"h10","Zonation and succession The community is typically found with grasslands, other kinds of heath and mires in zonations and mosaics where floristic variation is determined by differences in soils, local climate and treatments. Stable regimes of burning and grazing can hold any successional developments in check but, without some kind of treatment, many stands would probably progress to scrub and woodland. In the simplest edaphic sequences, the Calluna-Erica heath occurs over the driest in series of base-poor soils disposed over the hill-slopes of the upland fringes. In those more oceanic parts of northern Britain where it is concentrated, it typically gives way, over gley-podzols and stagnopodzols which can accumulate a thick humic top over the periodically waterlogged sub-soil, to the Scirpus-Erica wet heath. There Calluna retains its high frequency, but E. cinerea is usually replaced by E. tetralix, and Molinia and Scirpus cespitosus become very common and often abundant, with more or less total eclipse of the smaller grasses and a replacement of the pleurocarpous mosses by at least some Sphagna. Such transitions are usually seen over ground of decreasing slope, either moving down from hillsides with shedding drainage on to more gentle receiving ground or uphill on to plateaus with intergrades to ombrogenous peat, but they can be very gradual and, where discontinuous mantles of drift result in patchy variations of drainage impedence, intimate mosaics of the two vegetation types can be seen, even over gently-undulating or flat ground. In such patterns as these, Typical Calluna-Erica heath is often found grading into Typical Scirpus-Erica heath or, in more exposed situations or where the ground has been much degraded, the Racomitrium sub-community can be seen juxtaposed with the Cladonia sub-community of the Scirpus-Erica heath. Quite widely, too, the zonation runs on into the Scirpus-Eriophorum blanket mire over thickening ombrogenous peat. The proportion of these communities in the sequences varies with the rainfall because, with the shift into the wetter reaches of northwest Scotland, the wet heath and blanket mire spread on to ground of increasing slope, thus restricting the contribution of the dry heath. Drainage of the peat can reverse this trend and the spread of E. cinerea through the wet heath and on into the Cladonia sub-community of the blanket mire in the more oceanic parts of Britain, as in the Outer Hebrides (Hulme & Blyth 1984) and Shetland (Hulme 1985, Roper-Lindsay & Say 1986), is a striking indication of the shift of the vegetation towards the Calluna-Erica heath where the bogs have been much cut over. Analagous sequences to the above can also be seen where the community extends into eastern Scotland, though here the wet heath is usually represented by the Ericetum tetralicis and the blanket bog by the Calluna- Eriophorum mire. More often, though, in these latter zonations, the Calluna-Erica heath is itself replaced by the Calluna- Vaccinium heath, producing a boreal equivalent to the kinds of patterns normally seen in the oceanic west. However, as explained earlier, the two heath types do show some geographical overlap, when they are sometimes separated altitudinally, the Calluna- Vaccinium heath replacing the Calluna-Erica type with the move to higher ground, or according to aspect, when the com munities can be found in closer proximity, but with the Calluna- Vaccinium heath taking over with the shift on to slopes facing north and east. Other local climatic com plications can be seen among the dry-heath components of these kinds of sequences where sub-shrub vegetation runs right to the edge of sea-cliffs receiving appreciable https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.054 Published online by Cambridge University PressH10 Calluna vulgaris-Erica cinerea heath 477 amounts of salt-spray. In extreme cases the Calluna- Erica heath can be totally replaced by some kind of Calluna-Scilla heath, but the two communities sometimes occur together, zoned according to the gradient of spray deposition and showing great continuity in their sub-shrub components, the effect of maritime influence being mainly felt among the associated herb flora, the particular character of which is also influenced by the nature of the soil. Such patterns are well seen on Skye (Birks 1973), along the Caithness cliffs and in Shetland (Birse 1980, Roper-Lindsay & Say 1986), where the Festuca-Anthoxanthum sub-community and, on more base-rich soils, the Thymus-Carex type, grade to the maritime heath. Analagous patterns occur towards the back of some coastal dune-systems, where the Calluna- Erica heath grades to Calluna-Carex heath towards the sea. Zonations of these kinds, influenced primarily by differences in soils or climate or both, are all very often affected by treatments. In particular, burning, with its general tendency to favour vigorous regrowth of heather over the medium term, can blur boundaries between the Calluna-Erica heath and either the Scirpus-Erica wet heath or other types of drier sub-shrub vegetation, maritime or not, which occur adjacent to it, and it may take a considerable period of time before the floristic differences between the communities grow out to re assert the zonation that has been cut across by fire. Grazing, too, can confuse patterns by, for example, favouring an abundance of herbaceous associates that are shared by the different kinds of heath: Molinia can increase generally across the junction of the Calluna- Erica heath and the Scirpus-Erica wet heath and, in transitions to maritime sub-shrub vegetation, finer- leaved grasses and small herbs may be encouraged throughout, producing a general grassy appearance that masks the increasing influence of salt-spray. More generally important, however, is the effect which grazing, either alone or in conjunction with burning, has on mediating the transformation of this kind of heath to Nardo-Galion grasslands. After fire, very heavy grazing can precipitate a run-down of the heath to swards in which Nardus stricta or Juncus squarrosus play an important part or permit the spread of Pteridium aquilinum. But, less catastrophically than this, steady grazing pressure pushes the vegetation to wards the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland or, over more base-rich soils, the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland. The Festuca-Anthoxanthum and Thymus- Carex sub-communities are essentially intermediates along this developmental line and are very often found intermixed with the Nardo-Galion swards in mosaics which are determined by differences in grazing intensity. Many of these mixtures are stable and there is some pastoral advantage in having patches of the heath, which can provide a valuable winter bite, among the more generally nutritious grassland, but the long continuance of heavy pasturing, in areas like south-west Scotland, has certainly reduced the proportion of heaths in the mosaics (e.g. Hill & Evans 1978). Release from grazing and burning, except where the heath occurs in very exposed situations, theoretically permits progression to scrub and woodland though, in many areas, natural seed-parents are now scarce. Over the characteristic soils here, the most likely developments are the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland or, where the profiles are not quite so base-poor and oligotrophic, the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland, with in both cases birch, mostly Betula pubescens, rather than oak being very much the predominant tree. Where the community extends into east-central Scotland, the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland is a possible climax of successions involving the Calluna-Erica heath, with the Juniperus-Oxalis scrub perhaps figuring as a precursor (Birse 1980). In various parts of the range, but particularly in the Dumfries and Galloway hills, ground which would be at least partly occupied by the community has been extensively afforested and conifers from the plantations can seed into the heath. Distribution "