"h11","Zonation and succession The Calluna-Carex heath is a local element of zonations and mosaics on older stretches of coastal dunes and sand plain, grading to grasslands or various kinds of C. arenaria or Ammophila vegetation, or to scrub, woodland and bracken, in patterns which reflect the progression of the dune sere, differences in the character of the soils and the influence of past and present treatments. In most cases, the community would probably progress readily to scrub and woodland with relief from grazing, provided seed-parents of suitable shrubs and trees were available. The most striking complex of vegetation types among which the Calluna-Carex heath can be found involves the more calcifuge of the swards characteristic of stable dune sands. Quite often, it occurs within stretches of the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland, typically a short turf dominated by mixtures of C. arenaria, F. ovina, F. rubra, A. capillaris and Poa pratensis with Anthoxanthum and L. campestris occurring on the more impoverished sub strates, and scattered plants of G. saxatile, G. verum and L. corniculatus. Such vegetation can pass imperceptibly into the grassy ground of more open tracts of the Calluna-Carex heath, the major difference between the communities being the presence of sub-shrubs. Generally speaking, the distribution of these presents a sharp boundary: occasional bushes are sometimes to be seen isolated among more extensive stretches of grassland, but there is rarely that gentle gradation of size and age among the bushes that denotes a continuous process of invasion. More usually, it looks as if the patterns reflect past colonisation events, with the grassland/heath tran sitions often subsequently sharpened up by renewed grazing. Bryophytes can be fairly numerous and abundant in the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland, with patches of species like D. scoparium, P. juniperinum, C. pur pur eus, Pleurozium schreberi and H. splendens providing further continuity with the heath and, though lichens are generally less varied and abundant in the grassy swards, Cornicularia aculeata, Cladonia arbuscula and C. rangi- formis can occur in both vegetation types. This latter element, though, is much more generally obvious in those few localities where the Calluna-Carex heath occurs with the Car ex-Cornicularia community. In that assemblage, C. arenaria is the only constant vascular plant in a characteristically very open turf, with just occasional scattered tussocks of F. ovina and F. rubra, sparse L. campestris and only sporadic representation of most of the dicotyledonous associates listed above. However, H. radicata is common, together with Rumex acetosella, and there are quite often some annuals including Air a praecox. Most striking, though, and providing continuity with the lichen assemblage typical of the Erica sub-community of the Calluna-Carex heath, is Cornicularia aculeata and a great variety and abundance of Cladonia spp. Again, in such patterns, it is the occurrence of the sub-shrubs which provides the major distinction between the vegetation types. There is little doubt that the incidence and intensity of grazing, past and present, mediates much of the variation in patterns such as these developed over tracts of fairly uniform base-poor sands. In other situations, where the Calluna-Carex heath has managed to become established somewhat earlier in the dune succession on sands that are a little less stable or leached, treatments can interact with edaphic differences to produce other zonations. Then, the community usually passes to some https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.055 Published online by Cambridge University Press488 Heaths form of Festuca-Galium grassland, and where this is represented by the Luzula sub-community there can be considerable floristic continuity among the herbaceous element of the vegetation types, with F. rubra, A. capillaris, Anthoxanthum, L. campestris and C. arenaria contributing throughout to the turf. Quite apart from the disappearance of the sub-shrubs, however, the grassland is usually more varied in its vascular component with frequent records for such plants as G. verum, L. corniculatus, Plantago lanceolata, Trifolium repens, Hieracium pilosella, Achillea millefolium, Veronica cha- maedrys and Senecio jacobaea. Bryophytes and lichens are usually not so plentiful either, with Brachythecium albicans, Homalothecium lutescens, Rhytidiadelphus squarrosus and Pseudoscleropodium purum providing the bulk of the cryoptogam cover. More rarely, the Calluna-Carex heath can be found in sharper transitions to Typical Festuca-Galium grassland in which Ammophila may remain locally vigorous with some small measure of continuing accretion, or even to the Ammophila-Festuca community which is characteristic of still quite mobile and lime-rich dune sands around our coasts. Generally, though, the passage to this latter vegetation or to the Carex arenaria community is indicative of secondary local disturbance of the sand surface in tracts of dune or plain which are largely stable, something which can result from the burrowing or scuffing activities of rabbits or recreational activities of human visitors. Transitions to moister ground between dune ridges and in the surrounds to slacks can complicate these patterns. Sometimes, in such situations, there is a fairly sharp switch from heath to some fairly damp dune sward such as the Ranunculus-Bellis or Prunella sub communities of the Festuca-Galium grassland or the Ononis sub-community of Salix-Holcus slack. In other places, the Calluna-Carex heath passes into wet heath or heathy grassland on damp base-poor ground with quite a humic topsoil. There, C. arenaria, F. ovina, Anthoxanthum and G. saxatile can maintain some representation, along with certain of the hypnoid mosses, Calluna persisting patchily on drier areas, but dominance usually passes to mixtures of Erica tetralix, Nardus stricta, Juncus squarrosus and Salix repens. Transitions to such vegetation can be hard to diagnose, but the better-developed assemblages usually seem to be some form of Nardus-Galium grassland or run-down Ericion tetralicis wet heath. Release from grazing can allow stands of the Erica and Empetrum sub-communities to develop the leggy and impoverished look of the Species-poor sub community, with the associated sub-shrubs and many of the herbs and cryptogams overwhelmed by the Calluna. Where soil impoverishment under long-entrenched heather has not become too severe, and where parching of the surface is relieved somewhat, such vegetation may progress to woodland provided suitable seed-parents are not beyond the range of dispersal. Where more open stretches of ground remain among the bushes, birch is a very likely early invader, Betula pendula predominating on these drier soils, with B. pubescens becoming important in transitions to moister ground, where establishment is that much more ready. The appearance of birch, together with Pinus sylvestris and other conifers seeding in from the plantations that are an extensive feature of some stretches of fixed dunes, can presage a fairly speedy succession to thickets of the Quercus-Betula-Deschamp- sia woodland, within which the heath flora survives only in more open glades. In other situations, and particularly where there is some more obvious relief from soil impoverishment after bouts of manuring by stock or infestation with rabbits, or where there is a legacy of disturbance around old enclosures, scrub may supervene in the succession. Often, patches of Ulex-Rubus scrub mark out such enriched areas: Calluna may persist as occasional bushes in such vegetation, with species such as F. rubra, A. capillaris, Anthoxanthum and Galium saxatile forming much of the grassy ground, but the abundance of U. europaeus and R. fruticosus agg. is very striking and there are often patches of more mesophytic grasses like Dactylis glomerata and Holcus lanatus. Pteridium aquili- num can also occur among such scrub, thickening up where deeper sands are kept a little moister along the foot of dunes or on shady aspects into stands of the Pteridium-Galium community. Distribution "