"h12","Zonation and succession The Calluna- Vaccinium heath occurs in a wide variety of vegetation patterns with other sub-shrub communities, mires and grasslands, where floristic differences are controlled primarily by variations in soils, climate and treatments. Successional developments are usually held in check by burning and grazing and without these most stands would eventually progress to scrub and woodland, fragments of which can also be found in association with the community at some sites. The clearest soil-related sequences are seen where the free-draining brown earths or podzols which typically underlie the Calluna- Vaccinium heath give way to seaso- nally-gleyed base-poor soils such as stagnopodzols or gley-podzols. Such zonations sometimes reflect the dis tribution of impervious drift over otherwise fairly uniform ground but they are often disposed over slopes which are increasingly gentle and, in areas of higher rainfall, this kind of sequence can run on over accumulations of ombrogenous peat. In such situations, the shift on to periodically-waterlogged ground is typically marked by a transition to Ericion tetralicis wet heath. Through the heartland of the Calluna- Vaccinium heath, in the east-central Highlands, down through south-east Scotland to the North York Moors, such vegetation is generally represented by the Juncus-Dicranum sub community of the Ericetum tetralicis, in which the most characteristic changes are the appearance of Erica tetralix and Scirpus cespitosus with patchy Molinia caerulea and, in more intact stands, some Sphagnum compactum and S. tenellum. In fact, however, many tracts of this vegetation on grouse-moors and within hill-grazings are also subject to burning and pasturing, which can favour https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.056 Published online by Cambridge University Press498 Heaths the extension across the soil-related boundaries of fairly uniform canopies of heather, impoverished throughout, or, where the treatments have been especially frequent or severe, a progressive run-down with a spread of Juncus squarrosus among a much-reduced cover of sub shrubs, patterns well seen over some tracts of the North York Moors. This is sometimes a prelude to the development of wet Juncus-Festuca grassland though, in the less oceanic uplands, such vegetation tends to be rather local and often related to the occurrence of modest flushing among sequences of dry and wet heaths. Mosaics of these communities can sometimes be seen over the redistributed peat washed down from the eroding margins of blanket bogs over the high plateaus and watersheds of the uplands or extending on to the shallow intact peat of the bog plane proper where the fringes have become dry. But more complete sequences run on from impeded peaty soils to ombrogenous peats with Erico-Sphagnion vegetation, typically of the Cal luna-Eriophorum type with its often rather limited Sphagnum cover but continuing strong representation of sub-shrubs and bulky pleurocarps over its drier stretches. This kind of pattern can be seen on the grandest scale in the Cairngorms, with the various vegetation types disposed in roughly altitudinal zones over the massively-domed granite mountains (Watt & Jones 1948) but it is visible too in the Moffat and Moorfoot Hills in the Southern Uplands (Ward et al. 19726, Ratcliffe 1977, Hill & Evans 1978), the Cheviots and in the unpolluted parts of the Pennines (Tansley 1911, 1939). Such zonations form a pattern analogous to that seen in the more oceanic parts of western Britain, where the communities are generally replaced by the Calluna- Erica dry heath, the Scirpus-Erica wet heath and the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire. However, the geographical separation of these sequences is not complete and, where there is some overlap in their ranges, as in parts of the Southern Uplands, the drier sub-shrub communities generally partition according to altitude or aspect. The Calluna-Vaccinium heath, for example, can be found within the more oceanic zonation in the Moffat Hills and Galloway on higher crags or over slopes with a northerly or easterly aspect; conversely, the Calluna-Erica heath sometimes finds a place in the east-central Highlands on south-facing slopes at lower altitudes. Such shifts are to a great extent a reflection of the competitive balance between Calluna and E. cinerea or the Vaccinia (Figure 28). Other topoclimatic shifts can be seen in the east central Highlands too. Where conditions are particularly cold and humid, as around the steep and largely sunless corries on the northern slopes of the Cairngorms, the Calluna- Vaccinium heath is itself replaced by the Vaccinium-Rubus chamaemorus heath, a widespread community of the north-west and central Highlands but in the latter area often distinctly chionophilous, growing on humic rankers kept wet by long snow-lie. The appearance of R. chamaemorus with scattered Cornus suecica among the sub-shrubs and of patchy Sphagnum capillifolium are good indicators of this transition. Then, in more exposed situations, where rankers and podzols extend over ridges and summits, the Calluna- Vaccinium heath gives way to the Calluna-Cladonia heath in which the sub-shrub cover is often very dwarfed and where fruticose Cladonia spp., of restricted importance in the Calluna-Vaccinium heath, together with other large lichens, can be very varied and abundant. Arctostaphylos uva-ursi sometimes figures locally in such transitions but it is much better represented in zonations and mosaics with Calluna- Vaccinium heath at lower altitudes through the east-central Highlands. There, the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath has a very similar altitudinal and geographical range to this community and it is possible that burning has some role in mediating switches from one vegetation type to the other. But the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath is also more consistently associated with less-impoverished soils, typically acidic but often with moder humus rather than mor (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birse 1980), so a combination of treatment and edaphic factors may be responsible for the distribution of the two. The other widespread interaction between these vari ables involves transitions to Nardo-Galion grasslands, which are especially likely to develop where there has been grazing in the early stages of post-burn recovery. Then the appearance of the Galium-Festuca sub community may presage a succession to the Festuca- Agrostis-Galium grassland, the major plagioclimax pas ture of base-poor soils through the upland fringes. Sub shrubs typically have low frequency and cover in that vegetation but moderately heavy grazing may produce a more or less permanently-maintained mosaic of patches of heath among a grassy ground, or sporadic pasturing sustain a shifting balance of the elements in a more labile pattern with all shades of intermediate vegetation, something well seen in the accounts of Scottish grazings by King (1962) and King & Nicholson (1964). In many sites, however, continuous heavy grazing has favoured a progressive loss of sub-shrub vegetation to grassland, something which, over more fertile brown soils, is usually welcomed by graziers, though not by those with an interest in grouse, the numbers of which decline as the heather cover is reduced (e.g. Yalden 1972, Hewson 1977, Anderson & Yalden 1981). The constant danger in such situations, however, is the spread of Pteridium aquilinum which, particularly where the vigour of Cal luna is reduced by the burning and grazing of Calluna- Vaccinium heath over colluvial soils or well-drained drift, is likely to invade vigorously, producing dense https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.056 Published online by Cambridge University PressH12 Calluna vulgaris- Vaccinium myrtillus heath 499 Figure 28. Heath/mire zonations on the drier fringes of blanket bogs in (a) more atlantic north-west of Britain and (b) more boreal eastern Highlands of Scotland, with (c) the fragmentation of heath and mire in the latter with erosion and grazing. HlOa Calluna-Erica heath, Typical sub-community H12b Calluna- Vaccinium heath, Vaccinium-Cladonia sub-community M15c Scirpus-Erica wet heath, Cladonia sub-communityM16d Ericetum tetralicis, Juncus-Dicranum sub-community Ml7b Scirpus-EriophorummixQ, Cladonia sub-community Ml9b Calluna-Eriophorum mire, Empetrum sub-community U4 Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland U5 Nardus-Galium grassland U6 Juncus-Festuca grassland https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.056 Published online by Cambridge University Press500 Heaths stands of the Pteridium-Galium community within which sparse sprigs of the shade-tolerant Vaccinia may represent the limit of sub-shrub survival. Over less fertile peaty podzols, heavy grazing may result in the no less difficult problem of the expansion of Nardus stricta and the development of the Nardus- Galium grassland with its poor grazing potential. The kind of pattern seen so well in the map of Moor House in Cumbria (Eddy et al. 1969) is now very typical of many upland areas outside the grouse-moors: there, the zonation runs down from blanket bog on the high watershed, impoverished Eriophorum mire in many places, through a mosaic of Nardus-Galium and Juncus- Festuca grasslands, to Festuca-Agrostis-Galium swards, with ericoids making only a sparse appearance over inaccessible crags and screes. In extreme situations, heavy grazing may prevent the establishment of any vegetation cover on burned tracts of the Calluna- Vaccinium heath and where, by accident or mismanagement, fires have got out of hand and burned deep into the surface humus or even down to the mineral horizons beneath, such a combination of circumstances may be disastrous, triggering erosion by rain run-off or gullyerosion (Gimingham 1972, Maltby 1980, Maltby & Legg 1983). Burning and grazing are so widespread throughout the range of the Calluna- Vaccinium heath that, alone or in combination, they effectively maintain this kind of sub-shrub vegetation as a deflected climax which has little opportunity to progress to woodland, though there is little doubt that, except where it attains higher alti tudes or occurs in rather more exposed situations, this would be the natural trend. And, in the centre of its range, through the east-central Highlands, such developments would be likely to involve the invasion of pine and birch, often with juniper as a precursor or coincidental colonist. All these species are well able to take advantage of the open conditions established after fires, or even of scuffed areas in broken stretches of turf among the Calluna-Vaccinium heath, but the seedlings are very palatable and, where they are not eaten off, are soon crowded out by the regenerating sub-shrubs or herbs and any further germination, a light-dependent process in these plants, precluded (Miles & Kinnaird 1979, Gilbert 1980). With the widespread clearance of woodland, there is also often the problem of the remoteness of seed-parents, particularly critical in the case of pine. Nonetheless, fragments of woody vegetation sur vive quite widely on crags or in ravines within tracts of the Calluna-Vaccinium heath and over the terraced slopes through Speyside and Deeside there can be found some more extensive mosaics of the community with Juniperus-Oxalis scrub and Pinus-Hylocomium woodland (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe 1974, Huntley & Birks 1979«, b): indeed, it is patchworks of these vegetation types, often with Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath, that comprise the ‘Caledonian pine forest ’ in its broad landscape sense. In such patterns, the floristic similarities of the communities are eminently clear and, in many respects, the heath represents the field layer of more open stretches of scrub and woodland without the shrubs and trees. In this part of Britain at least, the Calluna- Vaccinium heath seems to have been derived by clearance of mixed forest of pine, birch and juniper whose elements are now to be seen in largely fragmentary form (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, O’Sullivan 1977). And the increased and long-continued abundance of Calluna in the vegetation which has largely replaced this forest has probably contributed to enhanced podzolisation in the soils (Gimingham 1972, Fitzpatrick 1977), a further factor perhaps in the difficulty of re-establishment of the original kind of climax vegetation. Elsewhere through the range of the Calluna-Vaccinium heath, the community is sometimes found in association with Juniperus-Oxalis scrub but, wherever there is any opportunity for serai progression, it is generally birch, usually Betula pubescens but locally with B. pendula, that is the leading colonist and this can quickly form dense thickets from which the less shade- tolerant heath plants are soon extinguished. Where more mature woodland is able to develop, among which oak can eventually find a place, usually Quercus petraea but with Q. robur sometimes seeding in from planted stock, it is typically of the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum type, with the Quer eus-Betula-Oxalis woodland locally represented over less infertile soils. Conifers often invade neglected heaths from plantations and can figure in such woodlands and, in places such as the North York Moors, many of the slopes which might carry Calluna- Vaccinium heath have been afforested with softwoods or, where unburned, have become covered by scrub in which such trees predominate. Distribution "