"h13","Zonation and succession The Calluna-Cladonia heath is typically found with other sub-shrub communities, montane grass-and moss-heaths and snow-bed vegetation in zonations and mosaics which reflect altitudinal and local topographically-determined variations in climate, especially the general temperature trend in moving on to higher ground and exposure. Geological heterogeneity can introduce edaphically-related complications into these patterns and, towards lower altitudes, treatments have often modified the transitions. With the geographical shift to the west, the elements of the vegetation sequence are increasingly replaced by their oceanic counterparts and, in between the climatic extremes, complex intermediate patterns of communities can be seen. The essential features of the altitudinal zonation characteristic of base-poor soils in our more continental mountains are best seen in the Cairngorms, where there is a strong measure of geological uniformity and a massive scale to the scenery, with the broad granite summits and watersheds and relatively gentle transitions in many areas to the lower slopes (Watt & Jones 1948, Poore & McVean 1957). Moreover, the prevailing infertility of the soils has meant that sheep-pasturing has figured little in the history of land-use there, such that sub-shrub heaths remain extensive throughout their climatic zones (Ratcliffe 1977). Not that there has been no modification to the natural vegetation pattern how ever: at lower altitudes, the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland is probably the climax community and, although stretches of this native pine forest remain, much of the ground below the Calluna-Cladonia heath now carries Calluna-Vaccinium heath which spread with clearance and which is now often maintained by burning for grouse-rearing. Many of the soils at these levels, though, are derived from superficials, so there is quite frequently some modest variation in soil fertility, with stands of the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath marking out less oligotrophic brown earths, and in drainage impedence, the Erice turn tetralicis occupying strongly-gleyed podzols. In some places, too, the Juniperus-Oxalis scrub occurs among mosaics of these heaths, essentially now behaving as a perpetually-renewed serai vegetation. Only on Creag Fhiaclach, at around 640 m on a north-western spur of the Cairngorm range, does this community form a convincing climatically-controlled fringe above the forest zone, grading up to the low-alpine belt, where the Calluna-Cladonia heath is typically found (Poore & McVean 1957). Generally, then, the upward transition to the Calluna-Cladonia heath is from one or other of the sub-shrub communities mentioned above, such that a predominance of heather is maintained, albeit in a dwarfed form at higher altitudes, right up to about 1000 m in these mountains. The shift from one vegetation type to the other is often gradual and the actual altitude at which the change decisively occurs varies with the degree of local exposure because of the strong dependence, in our prevailingly oceanic climate, on topography to maintain the required element of harshness of https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.057 Published online by Cambridge University PressH13 Calluna vulgaris-Cladonia arbuscula heath 509 climate characteristic of the whole low-alpine zone in more continental parts of northern Europe (Poore & McVean 1957). The stunting and wind-flattening of the sub-shrub mat and the abundance of lichens which are the chief general features of the transition thus appear at lower altitudes and more sharply where there is an early and abrupt move from sheltered slopes on to more open, wind-lashed ground. But there can be a strong continuity in the qualitative composition of the canopy even then and stands of the Calluna- Vaccinium and Calluna- A. uva-ursi heaths which are not in the dense pioneer or building phase of regeneration from burning sometimes develop lichen floras which approach those of the Cal luna-Cladonia heath in variety, though not generally in abundance. To such sub-montane heaths, the Cladonia sub community can be seen as transitional and this characteristically occupies the lower and more sheltered situations that develop a cover of Calluna-Cladonia heath, with the Empetrum-Cetraria or Cladonia-Ochrolechia sub-community ranged above it on the more exposed ridges and summits. Where the zonation continues upwards, on to ground that is too inhospitable for the survival of Calluna and where the winds are so strong that even lichens cannot get a hold in any abundance, the Calluna-Cladonia heath typically peters out into a zone of the Juncus-Racomitrium heath. Again, there can be a measure of floristic continuity among the vege tation types: J. trifidus itself makes an occasional appearance in the Calluna-Cladonia heath and a number of species remain frequent over the higher ground, such as Carex bigelowii, Deschampsia flexuosa, Vaccinium myrtillus and, with much reduced covers, various of the lichens. But the overall character of the vegetation is very different and, on the extensive tracts of ground above 1000 m through the Cairngorms, the shift to this rush-dominated community, developed as an open network over the loose erosion surfaces of the high plateaus, is very striking (Poore & McVean 1957, Ingram 1958, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). The major complications to the higher zones of this kind of transition are related to a decrease in exposure (Poore & McVean 1957). In the low-alpine belt, the sub communities of the Calluna-Cladonia heath themselves can be arranged, not in altitudinal bands, but in patches disposed according to the local variations in the amount of shelter provided by topography. The Empetrum- Cetraria and Cladonia-Ochrolechia sub-communities, for example, can be found at relatively low altitudes where the exposure is locally extreme, while the Cladonia sub-community can attain relatively high levels in hollows and on lee slopes. In this kind of situation, the latter type of Calluna-Cladonia heath is essentially transitional to the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath, which usually seems to experience longer snow-lie and which in some stands has a marked chionophilous character. Sometimes, the two sorts of lichen heath form mosaics over gently-undulating slopes, where the hollows catch a little snow and the convexities are largely blown clear, transitions from one community to the other being sometimes a matter of a shift in dominance from heather to bilberry. In other cases, the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath marks a clear intermediate zone between the Calluna-Cladonia heath and a snow-bed proper with Nardus-Carex grass-heath. At lower altitudes, where a shady aspect becomes progressively necessary to maintain long snow-lie, similar zonations to these can be found but with the Calluna-Cladonia heath giving way over the wind-blasted lip of the snow-bed, not to the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath, but to the Vaccinium-Rubus heath. At higher altitudes where, with some shelter, snow cover settles more uniformly, the Vaccinium- Cladonia heath may largely replace the Calluna-Cladonia heath, maintaining sub-shrub dominance for a further 100 m or so above the heather limit. Quite often, however, the major variation in zonation at the upper limit of the Calluna-Cladonia zone is attributable not so much to increased snow-lie as to the greater constancy of humidity across the cloudy summits away from extreme exposure. Then, there is a progressive tendency for the Calluna-Cladonia heath to give way above, not to the Juncus-Racomitrium heath, but to the Carex-Racomitrium heath, in which dominance typically lies with R. lanuginosum. And, in fact, this is essentially the shift from continental to oceanic conditions for, though no other mountain massif in Britain has so much of the J. trifidus fell-field vegetation as the Cairngorms, even a slight shift away from the more easterly summits reinforces what is there a local trend. Above Glen Feshie, for example, where there are some particularly fine stands of Calluna-Cladonia heath on the south-west facing spurs, the Carex-Racomitrium heath predominates above and with the shift to the Moine schist hills around Drumochter and Ben Alder, a little to the west, the Juncus-Racomitrium heath can be distinctly patchy above the Calluna-Cladonia heath. On Ben Wyvis, a massive bulk of Moine pelitic gneiss some 90 km to the north across the Great Glen, are the biggest tracts of the Carex-Racomitrium heath that we have in Britain, disposed over the broad summits and spurs and having some intricate marginal mosaics with the Cal luna-Cladonia heath, fragments of each community being included within a ground of the other in the boundary zone (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Then, moving just 25 km to the west, to Beinn Dearg in Ross-shire, there is a decisive shift to a much more oceanic pattern. This massif is unusual among the mountains of the north-west Highlands in that its Moine granulites and schists have been worn down to the kind of broad domed structure so typical of the Cairngorms but here, on the more exposed spurs and summits, R. lanuginosum has a strong edge over the lichens even among the dwarfhttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.057 Published online by Cambridge University Press510 Heaths shrub heaths. Below the Carex-Racomitrium zone, then, the Calluna-Cladonia heath is still to be found but it is increasingly replaced through the low-alpine zone in this part of Scotland by the Calluna-Racomitrium heath in which it is mosses that are co-dominant among the dwarfed sub-shrub mat. And, with the move downslope into the forest zone, the Calluna- Vaccinium heath typi cal of the eastern part of the country is often replaced by the Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath or, closer to the coastal fringe, the Calluna-Erica heath. As in the more continental sequence, bear berry heath can figure where the soils have moder humus rather than mor, but here it is Arctostaphylos alpinus rather than A. uva-ursi which is characteristic of the higher-altitude complexes of dwarfed sub-shrub heaths. On Beinn Dearg in Ross and Ben Wyvis, the Calluna-Cladonia and Calluna-Racomitrium heaths can both be found in patchworks with the Calluna-A. alpinus heath, their distributions governed by what are probably quite subtle differences in microclimate and soils. In the hills fringing the heart of its range, through Speyside and over some of the central Grampians, the characteristic zonations have been more drastically affected below with the sub-montane heath zone often largely occupied by grasslands derived by long-continued pasturing, and the impact of this sometimes penetrates on to the higher exposed ground where the Calluna-Cladonia heath is typical. Burns, too, can stray upwards though the diminutive canopy of the community does not readily take fire. For the most part, though, such treatments have little effect and this kind of heath can be considered a climax where progression to scrub and woodland is prevented by locally-severe exposure. Distribution "