"h14","Zonation and succession The Calluna-Racomitrium heath characteristically occurs in zonations and mosaics with other sub-shrub vegetation and montane heaths, snow-bed communities and mires where variation is mainly influenced by differences in climate and soils with altitude and local topography. Shifts on to more base-rich profiles derived from less siliceous parent materials can complicate these patterns and treatments have sometimes affected the lower reaches of zonations. The move south-eastwards sees a gradual geographical replacement of the more oceanic vegetation types in these sequences by their continental equivalents and, in the transition zone, intermediate patterns can be found. The typical altitudinal zonation in which the Calluna- Racomitrium heath occurs is well seen in the north-west Highlands over the slopes of Ben More Assynt and Foinaven (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe 1977). Here, the community is found on broad, windswept ridges cut into Cambrian quartzite, generally passing downslope into some other kind of sub-shrub vegetation. Locally, in more sheltered situations at lower altitudes, but where the soils remain relatively free- draining, the Calluna-Racomitrium heath is replaced by the Calluna-Erica heath, the Arctostaphylos sub community of the former and the Racomitrium sub community of the latter representing an almost continuous transition. Generally, however, such a sequence is better seen in the more oceanic conditions found on Skye (Birks 1973) and Orkney (Prentice & Prentice 1975), where the Calluna-Erica heath is much more frequent. And, through the north-west Highlands, too, the move downslope often involves a further shift on to less well-drained ground where some sort of wet heath is the more natural development. Usually, in this part of the country, it is the Scirpus-Erica heath that occurs in this position in the zonation, where shallow peat is beginning to accumulate over gleyed podzolic soils on the gentle slopes of the low-altitude plateaus. Here, the major floristic change is the marked increase in fre quency of Scirpus cespitosus and Molinia and the appearance of Erica tetralix but the pattern of dominance in this kind of vegetation is very varied and, in its Cladonia sub-community, the cryptogamie flora is very similar to that of the Calluna-Racomitrium heath and, again, the Arctostaphylos sub-community can form a gentle transition to it. The usual continuation of this kind of zonation is to Scirpus-Eriophorum blanket mire over the deeper and wetter peats of the waterlogged lower ground. Even where there is some strong element of floristic continuity between the Calluna-Racomitrium heath and the vegetation which replaces it downslope, there is usually an obvious physiognomic change from a mar kedly dwarfed character to a taller, bushier cover in which the vascular associates can make more luxuriant growth. Sometimes, though, as on Foinaven, the community gives way below to prostrate vegetation in which Juniperus communis ssp. nana becomes very common and often co-dominant with the stunted https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.058 Published online by Cambridge University Press518 Heaths heather but where such plants as Erica cinerea, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, A. alpinus and Empetrum nigrum remain quite frequent with usually sparse shoots of Racomitrium lanuginosum and lichens. Such Calluna-Juniperus heath is, like the Calluna-Racomitrium heath, chiono- phobous but it is really a transitional community on the junction of the low-alpine and sub-alpine zones (Poore & McVean 1957) and it has fairly common Pleur ozia purpurea, Frullania tamarisci and Diplophyllum albicans. It can be seen as the north-west Highland equivalent of the Juniperus-Oxalis scrub of the east-central Highlands, though there it is ssp. communis that colonises up to the limit of the forest zone. One other community that can be found at levels which are generally below those of the Calluna-Racomitrium heath, but which is also strongly dependent on cool and very humid conditions associated with shel tered, sunless slopes, is the Calluna-Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath. Here, some measure of floristic continuity is provided by R. lanuginosum and the bulky pleurocarp associates, but the oceanic hepatic component of the Calluna-Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath is so distinctive and its luxuriance so pronounced that there is never any real doubt as to where the transition occurs and, typi cally, it marks an obvious shift in aspect, from southerly or westerly slopes to those facing east or north. But both this vegetation and the Calluna-Juniperus heath can be badly damaged by burning so more diffuse mosaics can sometimes develop. Moving upslope on to ground that remains equally exposed to high winds as that carrying the Calluna- Racomitrium heath, the community is usually replaced by some kind of Carex-Racomitrium heath, a more compendious community in this scheme than previously understood and taking in much of the summit mossheath and some fell-field vegetation of the north-west Highlands. Again, the floristic transition can be a gra dual one with R. lanuginosum in particular retaining high cover, indeed generally increasing its extent to overwhelming dominance of the ground carpet, and Carex bigelowii, Deschampsia flexuosa, Diphasium alpi- num and certain of the lichens continuing in frequency. But Calluna is typically unable to survive at the higher altitudes occupied by this vegetation and, in sites like Ben More Assy nt and Foinaven, there is often additionally a suite of cushion herbs in the Carex-Racomitrium heath that gives the vegetation a very distinctive appearance. An alternative zonation over higher ground can be seen in parts of Foinaven where the Calluna-Racomitrium heath passes on summit blanket peat to the Calluna-Eriophorum mire. Two other complications to the basic pattern of communities deserve note. First, where there is some increase in shelter within the low-alpine zone and a little above it, such that a modest amount of snow can accumulate during the winter in shallow hollows, among block scree and over lee slopes, the Calluna- Racomitrium heath can give way to the Vaccinium- Racomitrium heath. Many species run on into this vegetation, but Calluna itself becomes very patchy and dominance generally passes to Vaccinium myrtillus or E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum which can thus extend the abundant representation of sub-shrubs to 100 m or more above the upper limit of heather. In other cases, a zone of the Vaccinium-Racomitrium or Vaccinium-Rubus heath forms a transitional belt around snow-beds proper, in cold and sheltered hollows among Calluna-Racomitrium heath. Such patterns are not well developed on Ben More Assynt and Foinaven, but they can be seen on Beinn Dearg where various types of Nardus-Carex vegetation mark out areas of late snow-lie over slopes cut into siliceous granulites, and also on the Lewisian gneiss of the Letterewe hills, though in this range the Calluna-Racomitrium heath itself is reduced to a rather fragmentary zone between Scirpus- Eriophorum blanket mire and the Carex-Racomitrium vegetation of the summits. The other variation involves the occurrence of dwarfed sub-shrub heath in which Arctostaphylos alpi nus is a consistent component, generally without A. uva- ursi, though often with Loiseleuria and various other of the Calluna-Racomitrium species. This, too, is a chiono- phobous vegetation type, characteristic of situations which are, if anything, even more exposed than those typical here and thus sometimes running on upslope from the Calluna-Racomitrium heath a little way over blasted brows. But A. alpinus is also associated with soils in which the humus is more like a moder than a mor, so there may be some subtle edaphic differences involved in patchworks of these vegetation types, such as can be seen on Foinaven and Ben Wyvis. As far east as Ben Wyvis, however, the Calluna- Racomitrium heath has almost petered out as a component of the low-alpine zone which, with increasing continentality of climate, extends to higher altitudes and has the Calluna-Cladonia heath as the prevailing dwarfed sub-shrub vegetation. Indeed, this already figures along with the Calluna-Racomitrium heath in low-alpine mosaics on Beinn Dearg in Ross and over the Affric-Cannich hills but, beyond the line between Ben Klibreck to the north and Ben Alder in the south, the shift away from the oceanic pattern is visible at all levels in the altitudinal zonation. Distribution "