"h15","Zonation and succession The Calluna-Juniperus heath typically occurs at the junction of the sub-and low-alpine zones (Poore & McVean 1957) in sequences of mires, other heaths, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.059 Published online by Cambridge University Press524 Heaths chionophilous vegetation and grasslands, where the major lines of floristic variation reflect climatic change with altitude and local exposure, edaphic differences and treatment. The community is a climax but is readily degraded by burning. Over the long ridge of Foinaven, the characteristic zonation is perhaps better disposed than on the more rugged landscape of the Beinn Eighe massif. Essentially, the Calluna-Juniper us heath punctuates the typical regional sequence from mire below to fell-field above where quartzite screes are exposed at moderate alti tudes. Immediately beneath it there is generally a mix ture of Calluna-Erica or Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heaths distributed according to aspect and themselves passing below to Scirpus-Erica wet heath and then to Scirpus-Er iophorum mire on the low-altitude blanket peats. The downslope boundary is typically marked by a thinning of the cover of juniper among a sub-shrub cover that is generally taller than here, though many of its associates in the Calluna-Juniperus heath run on with high frequency and abundance. The same is true above, too, where the community gives way over windswept spurs to the Calluna-Racomitrium and/or Calluna-A. alpinus heaths or where these vegetation types replace the Calluna-Juniperus heath over the more exposed south-western slopes of hills. Indeed, although these are characterised by an increase in the cover of cryptogams among the wind-trimmed mat, juniper itself can continue to have patchy representation in them and, where there is a smear of fine morainic material over the ridges, transitions can be especially gradual. These communities in turn can pass directly to Carex-Racomitrium heath or there can be an intervening zone of Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath, or a different kind of zonation altogether to high-altitude Calluna-Erio- phorum mire on the summit blanket peats (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe 1977). Chionophilous vegetation is not well developed among these zonations at Foinaven and, even on Beinn Eighe, there are only moderately late snow-beds but, where north- or east-facing slopes become very shady and cold, the Calluna-Juniperus heath passes to Vacci- nium-Rubus heath or, towards the upper limits of its altitudinal range, Nardus-Carex or Deschampsia- Galium communities. Similar patterns can be seen in Letterewe Forest, though there the Calluna-Juniperus heath itself is rather fragmentary. In some places, too, grassy vegetation is well represented over drier ground above and below the community with Festuca-Agrostis- Galium and Nardus-Galium grasslands or, where there is some flushing with more base-rich waters, the Festuca- Agrostis- Thymus or Festuca- Agrostis- Alchemilla swards . At lower altitudes, especially, a variety of sub-shrub vegetation can be converted to such grasslands by grazing, though the rocky ground characterised by the Calluna-Juniperus heath is often more difficult of access. Where the community has been burned, however, the vegetation may be degraded to a very fragmentary cover with substantial erosion of the exposed soil mantle and from such a condition recovery may be very slow (Poore & McVean 1957, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Distribution "