"h16","Zonation and succession With woodland, scrub, other sub-shrub communities and grasslands, the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath comprises a distinctive suite of vegetation types in the sub-montane zone of the east-central Highlands. These are the var iously-modified derivatives of the original forest cover, produced by clearance, burning and grazing and, in the case of this community, dependent upon management as grouse-moor or rough pasture to prevent regression to secondary woodland. The Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath can be seen in large-scale altitudinal sequences, giving way above to dwarfed heaths and fell-field communities, which are climatic climax vegetation, and there are zonations to wet heath and mire with changes in topography and soils. Long and quite intensive histories of land use in this part of Scotland (e.g. Birks 1970, O’Sullivan 1977, Carlisle 1977) mean that substantial tracts of more natural vegetation are rare. There is little doubt that, in the east-central Highlands, the climax forest type is similar to the vegetation seen today in the Pinus-Hyloco- mium woodland, but many surviving stands of this have been treated for timber production, sometimes involving planting, and the natural regeneration of the community is often somewhat problematical (Steven & Carlisle 1959, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe 1977). Then, although birch and juniper clearly figured in the original forest patchwork, and sometimes remain today in close association with native pine, many tracts of the Juniperus-Oxalis scrub behave as remnant understoreys, being perpetuated distant from the kind of woodland one might imagine could succeed them and rarely showing any natural progression. Indeed here, too, there is sometimes only sporadic regeneration of the scrub cover itself (Carlisle & Brown 1968, Carlisle 1977, Miles & Kinnaird 1979). The Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath can probably be seen as a further stage in this disruptive reversal of vegetation development, a plagioclimax community that has much in common floristically with the field layers of both these communities, which is sometimes seen among and around them, but which perhaps reverts only with difficulty to its more natural forebears, even when the constraints of regular burning are released. So, although all three communities are very characteristic of the region and form integral elements in the large-scale landscape of what is understood as ‘Caledonian pine forest ’ (Steven & Carlisle 1959, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962), it is only in a relatively few places that they can be seen in a more intimate juxtaposition and, even then, their relationship is rarely in any sense a dynamic one. The stretch of country between Rothie- murchus and Abernethy, in the middle reaches of the Spey, is one of the best areas where the similarities between the vegetation types can be appreciated. On a general level, there can be frequent records in all three for Calluna, V. myrtillus, V. vitis-idaea, Deschampsia flexuosa, Hypnum jutlandicum, Dicranum scoparium, Pleurozium schreberi, Hylocomium splendens, such that it often appears as if the heath runs virtually unaltered under the more open stretches of shrubs and trees. More strikingly, although A. uva-ursi itself rarely figures in the scrub or woodland, being intolerant of extensive areas https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.060 Published online by Cambridge University PressH16 Calluna vulgaris-Arctostaphylos uva-ursi heath 533 of deeper shade from which it cannot extend out, there is quite often some continuity between the different com munities in the kind of associated herb flora so distinctive of the Pyrola-Lathyrus sub-community of the Cal luna-A. uva-ursi heath. Where the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland and Juniperus-Oxalis scrub extend on to the less oligotrophic brown soils, for example, more mesophytic grasses and also herbs such as Luzulapilosa, Viola riviniana and Campanula rotundifolia can be found throughout. Moreover, there are also records in each for certain of the Continental Northern and Northern Montane species which give some stands of the Calluna- A. uva-ursi heath a particular phytogeographic stamp: Listera cordata, Trientalis europaea and Pyrola media, for example, provide a common element which confirms the boreal character of these peculiar eastern Scottish vegetation types. Establishment of juniper and pine in stands of Cal luna-A. uva-ursi heath seems to be rare: although both can exploit the post-burn habitat (indeed, perhaps depend on it to a great extent), any regeneration is curtailed by repeated burning or overgrowth of heather. Seed-parents are often distant, too, so, if there is any progression to woodland with cessation of treatment, it is birch that generally predominates among the invaders. On the Muir of Dinnet, for example, Urquhart (1986) indicates a very substantial reduction of the area of the community since 1946 as a result of the spread of birch. The likely development over the less-impoverished brown soils would be the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland, a common secondary forest type in this region and having there a distinctive Anemone sub community, with, again, such species as A. nemorosa, Trientalis, Luzula pilosa, Lathyrus montanus and Rhytidiadelphus triquetrus providing strong floristic continuity with the heath. Where the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath extends on to more base-poor and oligotrophic podzolised profiles, it is increasingly likely to be subordinate in its extent to the Calluna- Vaccinium heath and, in fact, through the east central Highlands as a whole, this latter community is strongly predominant through the sub-montane zone, the former occurring as what are relatively small islands scattered through it (Urquhart 1986). As indicated earlier, treatment for grouse-rearing may have accentuated the partly edaphic contrast between ‘rich ’ and ‘poor ’ moors, and it seems likely that injudicious burning, leading to an overwhelming dominance of Calluna, with consequent enhancement of podzolisation, could shift the pattern from an abundance of the richer kind of Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath to the poorer Calluna-Vaccinium types. Certainly, with a move towards the latter, the peculiar boreal character of eastern Scottish sub shrub vegetation is lost and, although serai progression to woodland can occur from such heath, where it is abandoned, the secondary birch-dominated Quercus- Betula-Dicranum woodland that develops is likewise much less floristically distinctive than its more mesophytic counterpart. Mosaics of the two heath communities, with more fragmentary representation of juniper and pine vegetation, are a very characteristic feature of the Grampian foothills throughout Speyside and north of the Dee, and over the lower slopes of the Monadhliath and Cairngorm mountains (Ratcliffe 1977, Urquhart 1986). With the shift to higher altitudes through this region, above the forest zone where they now often comprise the bulk of the cover on more free-draining soils, there is a move to other kinds of sub-shrub vegetation. Over very exposed ridges and spurs, it is the dwarfed Calluna- Cladonia heath that is characteristic, replacing the Cal luna-A. uva-ursi heath at around 670 m in the Cairngorms (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962): A. uva-ursi itself can run on in some abundance into the wind-pruned mat of the lichen heath, and more stunted stands of the Vaccinium sub-community of the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath can form a transition zone between the two. Beyond, there is then a gradation to Juncus-Racomitrium heath. More sheltered situations at intermediate altitudes in such sequences, particularly where a northerly or east erly aspect ensures longer snow-lie, can have stands of the Vaccinium-Rubus heath. Throughout these altitudinal and topographic zonations, a switch to soils with impeded drainage can see transitions to wet heaths and mires. At lower altitudes, as over the Cairngorm slopes, mosaics of Calluna-A. uva-ursi and Calluna-Vaccinium heaths can pass over gleyed peaty podzols to the Ericetum tetralicis in which mixtures of Calluna and Scirpus can predominate and where Cladonia impexa, C. uncialis and peat-encrusting lichens can provide additional continuity with the Cla donia sub-community of the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath characteristic of surface-damp humic soils. Over higher ground, blanket peats on plateaus can have a cover of the Calluna-Eriophorum mire above the sub-montane heaths: a particularly striking sequence of this kind can be seen above the Findhorn River in the northern Grampians, where the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath, including some good Pyrola-Lathyrus type, occupies the steeper slopes, passing over the gently-domed summit of Carn Nan Tri-Tighearnan to spectacular lichen-rich blanket bog. Distribution "