"h17","Zonation and succession The Calluna-A. alpinus heath is typically found with other kinds of sub-shrub vegetation, snow-bed communities, mires and montane sedge-heaths in zonations and mosaics which reflect variations in climate and soils with altitude and local topography and, towards its lower limits, the impact of treatments. With the geographical shift towards the more continental eastern parts of Scotland, there is a replacement of many of the elements in these more oceanic vegetation patterns. The characteristic position of the Calluna-A. alpinus heath, occupying the most exposed situations in the low- alpine zone of the north-west Highlands, is well seen around Beinn Eighe (Ratcliffe 1977). There the community is found on windswept stony moraines on gentle mid-altitude slopes with, below, over the more sheltered drift-covered hillsides, a transition to the Vac- cinium-Rubus heath or, on steeper sunless slopes with constantly high humidity, the Calluna- Vaccinium- Sphagnum heath. Calluna usually remains dominant in both these vegetation types and E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum continues as a constant but Vaccinia, particularly V. myrtillus, become more prominent and beneath the taller, more luxuriant canopy of sub-shrubs, there is a rich and extensive carpet of pleurocarpous mosses and Atlantic hepatics, especially in the Calluna-Vaccinium- Sphagnum heath which gives well-developed stands a strikingly different appearance. In some places, as above Loch Maree, fragments of the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland give a clue as to the original forest cover of this zone of damp heather-moor https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.061 Published online by Cambridge University PressH17 Calluna vulgaris-Arctostaphylos alpinus heath 541 but usually the vegetational variety towards the sub montane slopes is provided by transitions to Scirpus- Erica wet heath on moist peaty soils and then to Scirpus- Eriophorum mire on the low-level ombrogenous bogs. Direct zonations from the Calluna-A. alpinus heath to the Scirpus-Erica heath sometimes show considerable floristic continuity where Calluna, Erica cinerea, Scirpus cespitosus and Racomitrium lanuginosum run on with an abundance of lichens over the eroding margins of a peat mantle on stony morainic material. In the north-west Highlands, the Calluna-A. alpinus heath overlaps altitudinally with the Calluna-Juniperus heath and, though this is now a much more local community, the two can sometimes be found in close proximity, as over the north-east slopes of Beinn Eighe, the latter tending to occur a little lower down the mountain sides and best developed on slopes with some shelter and shade. In both composition and physiognomy, the vegetation types are very close with Calluna, E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum, A. alpinus and A. uva- ursi all maintaining high frequency in a dwarfed sub shrub cover, but Juniperus communis ssp. nana is scarce in the Calluna-A. alpinus heath and the distinctive hepatics of the juniper heath, Pleur ozia purpurea, Diplophyllum albicans and Frullania tamarisci hardly ever occur in the more exposed situations at these altitudes. The Calluna-Juniperus heath is a chionophobous community and in hollows among stretches of Calluna- A. alpinus heath where snow accumulates, there can be sharp transitions to Nardus-Carex vegetation of various kinds. This community can run on up into the mid- alpine zone where shelter is sufficient to allow a snow cover to remain but, very typically through the northwest Highlands, the Calluna-A. alpinus heath gives way over exposed rounded high-altitude spurs and summits to the Carex-Racomitrium heath, the characteristic moss-heath and fell-field vegetation of our cold oceanic mountains. Again, there can be some floristic continuity through Racomitrium lanuginosum and the lichens and Carex bigelowii, Vaccinium myrtillus and Deschampsia flexuosa and the physiognomic similarity of the communities is well seen where solifluction and wind erosion combine to fragment the cover of the heath into a mosaic of vegetation among stretches of bare morainic gravel. Typically, however, heather does not extend to the higher altitudes and, though Loiseleuria can occasionally be found, the summit vegetation is typically moss- dominated and often distributed over striking tracts of open ablation surfaces. In fact, over the rugged peaks of Beinn Eighe, the Carex-Racomitrium heath is not nearly so extensive in the zone above the Calluna-A. alpinus heath as on Beinn Lair in Letterewe, over the Fannich Hills, on the massive rounded tops of Beinn Dearg and, towards the north-western limit of the mainland range of the community, on Ben Klibreck. On the last site, too, can be seen an alternative transition over high-altitude plateau to Calluna-Eriophorum blanket mire. Throughout this main part of its range, though again more obviously on some of these other mountains than on Beinn Eighe, the Calluna-A. alpinus heath overlaps geographically and altitudinally with the closely-similar Calluna-Racomitrium heath. Sometimes, as along the seaboard of the north-west Highlands, where broad exposed spurs extend down to relatively low altitudes, it is this latter community that is predominant, with the Calluna-A. alpinus heath prevailing with the shift into the higher, mountainous heartland. But, as in the Letterewe Hills and Beinn Dearg and also on Hoy in Orkney, the two can occur contiguously, the moss-heath perhaps occupying the somewhat less sheltered situations with mor soils but sometimes showing no apparent habitat preference. Towards the eastern margin of the range of the Calluna-A. alpinus heath there is a further complication in that the geographical ranges of the western heaths overlap there with that of the Calluna-Cladonia heath. On Ben Wyvis and Ben Klibreck, for example, the latter occurs in mosaics with the Calluna-A. alpinus heath, the distribution of the alpine bearberry often effectively serving to distinguish the two. All these three dwarfed sub-shrub heaths are climatic climax communities but they are often contiguous below with vegetation markedly influenced by treatments, particularly the burning and grazing associated with hill-pasturing. The Calluna-A. alpinus heath thus sometimes gives way below, or towards its lower altitudinal limits is surrounded by plagioclimax Nardo- Galion swards, such as the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium or Nardus-Galium grasslands, in which sub-shrubs may survive patchily but where dominance lies with the grasses and dicotyledons which make but an occasional appearance here. Distribution "