"h18","Zonation and succession The Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath can be seen as a part of altitudinal sequences from sub-montane woodlands, grasslands and sub-shrub vegetation through to high- level moss-heaths and fell-field where transitions reflect increasing harshness of climate above and biotic influences below, with additional zonations to mire communities with edaphic shifts. Within the low-alpine zone, the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath occurs as a climax vegetation type among dwarfed sub-shrub com munities and snow-beds, patterns being determined largely by gradients of exposure and snow-lie. Through much of its range, fragmentation of the forest cover towards the upper limit of the sub-montane zone is such that it is often difficult to see the Vaccinium- Deschampsia heath as the high-altitude replacement of woodland or sub-alpine scrub. But the floristic continuity between the different vegetation types is very striking and many of the heath plants form an integral part of the field layers of the Quercion and Dicrano- Pinion woodlands found over more base-poor soils on siliceous bedrocks and drift at lower levels. Towards the west of Scotland and down through northern England and Wales, the Hylocomium-Rhytidiadelphus sub community reaches down to the upper altitudinal limits of the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland and, where fragments of this remain in ravines or on screes, they sometimes give way above to a fringe of the bilberry heath (Lewis & Moss 1911, Ferreira 1978). Similar patterns occur in eastern Scotland, too, though here it is the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland that probably represents the sub-montane climax vegetation and, around the Cairngorms, the Hylocomium-Rhytidiadelphus sub community replaces it on more sheltered sites above. Here, also, the Juniperus-Oxalis scrub can be seen as a convincing intermediate in the sequence, occurring at the natural upper limit of tree growth in some places, though hardly ever in zonations which run right through from the montane heath above to the woodland below. In other places, it is tail-herb vegetation, generally of the Luzula-Vaccinium type, or the Thelypteris limbosperma community, that provides floristic continuity between the extremes of the sequence, ferns, tall herbs, shrubs and trees thus representing the structural elements appearing towards lower altitudes. Analogous patterns to these can be seen where less base-poor profiles developed from calcareous substrates are disposed over slopes of increasing altitude. Here, the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath can maintain its rep resentation on the higher ground, but it occurs generally as the Alchemilla-Carex sub-community, a replacement well seen in comparing the zonations of the Cairngorms with those of the Breadalbane-Clova area, or in moving across the boundary of siliceous and calcareous rocks on the summit ridge of Carn a’Chlarsaich near The Cairnwell (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). And, in the sub montane, the climax forest is the Quer eus-Betula-Oxalis woodland or the less markedly calcifuge types of Pinus- Hylocomium woodland. Again, floristic similarity is obvious, spatial continuity rare because of forest destruction. The widespread occurrence of woodland clearance and the prevalence of burning and grazing through the sub-montane zone thus often mean that the Vaccinium- Deschampsia heath gives way below to anthropogenic sub-shrub communities maintained for sheep or grouserearing. Through much of its range, its replacement at lower altitudes is the Calluna- Vaccinium heath, with the Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath figuring on less infertile soils in eastern Scotland, and the Calluna-Deschampsia heath prevailing in the polluted southern Pennines. Heather tends to be an overwhelming dominant in each of these vegetation types and, even where other sub-shrubs play a part, as in the early stages of regeneration after burning, the Arctic-Alpines are generally less prominent than in the bilberry heath, but the floristic similarities are considerable, both among the vascular plants and the cryptogam element. In some situations, as over the crags and screes of the Pennine grits, which rise to higher ground separated by intervening tracts of blanket mire on the dips, the contrast between the sub-montane Calluna-Deschampsia heath and the high-altitude Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath can be quite striking (Lewis & Moss 1911, Tansley 1939). In other places, the shift to higher ground is also marked by an increase in slope and, on northern exposures, of shade which favour the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath on cool steep talus and cliffs, well seen in Edgell ’s (1969) map of Cader Idris. But, often, the transition between the vegetation types is a gradual one, and it can be particularly complicated where shelter below favours bilberry, while the extension of treatments on to higher ground favours heather. Towards its lower altitudinal limits, and particularly https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.062 Published online by Cambridge University PressH18 Vaccinium myrtillus-Deschampsia flexuosa heath 551 over warmer south-facing slopes, it seems likely that some stretches of the Alchemilla-Carex sub-community have been biotically derived and are now maintained as plagioclimax intermediates between the forest types noted above and Nardo-Galion grasslands. In parts of the Southern Uplands, for example, in the Cheviot (King 1962), Breadalbane (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962) and Caenlochan (Huntley 1979), this kind of Vaccinium- Deschampsia heath is commonly found among Festuca- Agrostis-Thymus and Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grasslands, the disposition of the different elements of the mosaics being a rather complex function of treatments, topoclimate and edaphic factors (King 1962, Huntley 1979). Zonations to the Festuca-Agrostis- Alchemilla grassland can be especially gradual, but the difference between the communities is partly one of the proportions of sub-shrubs to grasses and A. alpina and partly to do with the more frequent occurrence of mesophytes and mildly calcicolous plants in the grassland. With increasing altitude, however, and a decisive shift into the low-alpine zone of the higher mountains within the range of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, it is natural factors, particularly exposure and snow-lie, which determine the major trends in the vegetation patterns. Thus, wherever there is a move on to slopes which feel the force of strong winds and which are thus blown clear of snow, the community tends to be replaced by dwarfed sub-shrub vegetation in which V. myrtillus plays but a small role and where stunted heather is generally abundant. In the central and eastern Highlands, such vegetation is usually of the Calluna-Cladonia heath, where the lichens which are generally of small cover in the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath assume a sometimes co-dominant role and where distinctly chio- nophobous species can be found. In the opposite direction, with an increase in the duration of snow-lie, the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath is replaced by Nardus- Carex vegetation, with its shift to abundance of Nardus and C. bigelowii and preferentially frequent Scirpus cespitosus and Juncus squarrosus. Zonations between these communities can be found disposed over slopes of differing aspect, around nivation hollows (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962) and over the treads and risers of terraced slopes (Burges 1951), where sometimes quite subtle variations in inclination and shelter are sufficient to influence the balance between the species. A further complication in some sites is the occurrence among these sequences of the Vaccinium-Rubus heath, a vegetation type that seems equally chionophilous to the Vaccinium- Deschampsia heath, but where Calluna can maintain a better representation, with Rubus chamaemorus preferentially frequent. Sometimes, too, the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath can be found at similar altitudes to the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath. Like the Calluna-Cladonia heath, this is very lichen-rich vegetation in which sub-shrubs are often reduced to a co-dominant role, but it is not a chionopho- bous community: indeed, it probably experiences simi lar duration of snow-lie to the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath. V. myrtillus maintains its frequency there and both E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum and V. vitis-idaea are common, the former often in abundance. But Cladonia spp. are much more plentiful along with Carex bigelowii and this is a vegetation type which can extend to higher levels than the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, representing a transition to the Juncus-Racomitrium or Carex-Racomitrium heath on summit fell-fields. The Racomitrium-Cladonia sub-community can sometimes be found as a transition to these low-alpine com munities. With the geographical shift towards the north-west Highlands the elements in these zonations tend to move to somewhat lower altitudes and, in some cases, to be replaced by more oceanic equivalents. The Vaccinium- Deschampsia heath can still be found in this part of Scotland, although in this scheme, some of the vegetation which McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) grouped within their Festuceto-Vaccinetum rhacomitrosum is transferred to the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath. With its typically western abundance of R. lanuginosum, this community, together with the local stands of Vaccinium- Deschampsia heath, occupies part of the low-alpine zone, being replaced below by the Calluna- Vaccinium- Sphagnum heath, where oceanic hepatics can play a prominent role, and passing at higher altitudes to Carex-Racomitrium heath. Sub-shrub vegetation dependent on a humid climate, is, in this part of Britain, less strictly confined to shaded aspects but transitions to Nardus-Carex vegetation can be seen where snow persists and the community is also found among stretches of the chionophilous Deschampsia-Galium grassland. Over exposed spurs in this part of Scotland, the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath is replaced by the Calluna-Racomitrium or Calluna-A. alpinus heaths. Distribution "