"h19","Zonation and succession The Vaccinium-Cladonia heath is a characteristic ele ment in the sequences of sub-shrub communities and snow-bed vegetation of the low-alpine zone of the continental mountains of the east and central Highlands, among which floristic variation is strongly related to exposure and snow-lie. Here, it occurs at the limit of ericoid dominance, marking the altitudinal transition in more sheltered situations from sub-alpine and sub montane heaths to summit moss-heath, fell-field or mire. Geology and soils affect the particular kinds of communities represented with the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath and, towards lower altitudes, treatments have modified the vegetation cover but these are not important in maintaining the community itself. The broad altitudinal zonations in which the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath plays an integral part are most https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.063 Published online by Cambridge University Press560 Heaths obvious over the upper slopes of the Cairngorms and on the mountain tops of the Breadalbane-Clova region. On the impoverished granite soils typical of the former area, where there has been relatively little impact of sheepgrazing, sequences of sub-shrub vegetation are extensive, starting with mosaics of the Calluna- Vaccinium and Calluna-A. uva-ursi heaths with fragments of Pinus- Hylocomium woodland and Juniperus-Oxalis scrub through the sub-montane and up into the sub-alpine zone. Above these levels, past the present limits of tree growth and beyond the influence of the regular burning employed to regenerate the lower-altitude heaths for grouse-rearing, the particular zonation becomes strongly dependent on exposure. Wind-blasted spurs and ridges have the Calluna-Cladonia heath and, though the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath finds occasional representation in such situations, it is usually in less exposed places that the community begins to make an obvious contribution to the cover. Indeed, the effects of local shelter can already be seen at lower altitudes in this region, where the Hylocomium- Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath often marks out large shallow snowbeds towards the transition to the sub-alpine zone, with the Polytrichum-Galium sub-community of the Vacci- nium-Rubus heath extending even further below, where easterly or northerly aspects provide shaded and cool conditions. Observation suggests (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962) that each of these vegetation types experiences roughly similar regimes of snow-lie and, among them, the Empetrum-Cladonia sub-community of the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath can be seen as the high-altitude representative of a mildly chionophilous suite. Quite often, however, mosaics of the Vaccinium-Cladonia and Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath can be found disposed across hillsides in the low-alpine zone, the enclosed patches of the latter being marked out by a shift from a predominance of lichens among the cryptogamie ele ment to bulky pleurocarps, and by the appearance of species like Blechnum spicant and Cornus suecica. Although there are places where the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath can be seen in extensive tracts, the more usual picture is for this kind of mosaic to continue, with moves to slopes that are more exposed or less, to the Calluna-Cladonia heath on the one hand or to snow-bed vegetation on the other. Transitions to the former are typical of gently undulating hillsides, where the rounded spurs get blown clear of snow, the concavities accumulating a little, and where the move from one community to the other is denoted largely by a replacement of heather by bilberry among a superabundant ground of lichens. Similar transitions can be seen on moving off the exposed tops of the risers on terraced slopes on to the sheltered treads and on shifting round from wind- blasted slopes on to more sheltered aspects and here the Racomitrium sub-community is sometimes seen as a transition to either Nardus-Carex or Car ex-Poly trichum snow-beds. Moves towards the former involve a reduction in the contribution of V. myrtillus and the less snow- tolerant lichens, with an increase in the abundance of R. lanuginosum and a marked dominance of Nardus stricta. In the latter, V. myrtillus and the other sub-shrubs are often absent, but C. bigelowii remains prominent with chionophilous bryophytes such as Polytrichum alpinum and Dicranum fuscescens very common. In such pat terns, the patches of the different vegetation types can vary from just a few square metres to hectares in extent. The greater snow-tolerance of the Vaccinia and E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum over Calluna means that the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath often runs on above the limit of the Calluna-Cladonia heath, maintaining a strong sub-shrub representation for a further hundred metres or more and, in such situations, it can replace it in moderately exposed habitats just within the mid-alpine zone. Over the windy and cloud-ridden summits of the Cairngorms, however, the community typically gives way to the Juncus-Racomitrium fell-field vegetation or, more locally, the Carex-Racomitrium heath. V. myrtillus continues with some frequency into such communities, though at low covers, and dominance is usually shared between such plants as C. bigelowii, R. lanuginosum, F. ovina and J. trifidus. Very similar zonations to these can be seen on Monadhliath and Lochnagar but, with the move on to the Dalradian rocks of the Clova area and down to Breadalbane, where lime-rich exposures begin to figure prominently, there are some differences in the vegetation types represented in the various altitudinal zones and, with many of the mountains having small or sloping summits, the upper end of the sequence is often trun cated. The Empetrum-Cladonia sub-community of the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath can be found over quartzose mica-schists and other siliceous rocks through this region but, quite often, it is the Festuca-Galium sub community that is represented over the more base-rich rocks, and here this continues upwards the mildly chionophilous character of the Alchemilla-Carex sub community of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath. Towards lower altitudes, this in turn can pass to Festuca- Agrostis-Alchemilla grassland where sheep-grazing res tricts the contribution from the sub-shrubs. Over the less siliceous rocks, the Calluna-Cladonia heath tends to be poorly represented, even where there is quite severe exposure, but some kinds of later snow-beds can be seen over ground where there is a little more shelter than with the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath, with transitions to certain kinds of Nardus-Carex and Car ex-Poly trichum vegetation. Towards the north-west of Scotland, the Vaccinium- Cladonia heath retains some representation in sequences https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.063 Published online by Cambridge University PressH19 Vaccinium myrtillus-Cladonia arbuscula heath 561 that have an altogether more oceanic character, sub suming some of the vegetation which McVean & Rat cliffe (1962) placed in their Festuceto-Vaccinetum rhacomitrosum. In this part of Britain, the effects of the greater humidity of climate are felt to some extent on all aspects and R. lanuginosum-rich bilberry heaths occur widely between 400 and 1000 m where there is some measure of shelter from winds. The bulk of them can be grouped within the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath where there is a consistent shift away from lichens as the usual co dominants in the mat, but the Racomitrium sub community of the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath is seen locally as a geographical transition to this more western vegetation type. At lower altitudes the sequences among the heaths pass to Vaccinium-Rubus and Calluna- Vacci- nium-Sphagnum heaths, and upwards there is extensive Carex-Racomitrium heath over the broader summits, with Nardus-Carex snow-beds in sheltered hollows. Distribution "