"h2","Zonation and succession Zonations between the Calluna-Ulex minor heath and other vegetation types are generally related to edaphic variation or to differences in treatment. Burning and grazing can modify soil-related patterns and also create effects of their own: most obviously they mediate the invasion of this vegetation by trees and very often now, with their decline, the community survives as a decreasing element in patchworks of woodland, heath and bracken. Elsewhere, stands give way abruptly to agricultural land, coniferous forest or encroaching settlements. In the traditional kind of heath landscape of central southern and south-east England, preserved extensively now only in the New Forest, the imposition of grazing and burning over large areas enables the effect of edaphic variation to be seen in a very distinctive sequence of sub-shrub communities. Within this pat tern, the Calluna-Ulex minor heath occupies the most free-draining of the series of acid and impoverished soils, typically podzols which show no tendency, or only a slight one, towards surface-water gleying in winter. With the shift to profiles with somewhat more severe or consistent drainage impedence, as where there is a strong pan development or a markedly argillic B hori zon, the community typically gives way, through the Dorset and Hampshire area, to the Ulex minor-Agrostis curtisii heath. The boundary between the vegetation types can be ill-defined, but, in this moderately oceanic part of Britain, the move on to soils which show even only a slightly greater tendency to gleying is marked by the consistent appearance of E. tetralix along with E. cinerea, and the replacement of D. flexuosa by Molinia and A. curtisii. The sequence of vegetation types then continues with the Ericetum tetralicis, on seasonally surface-waterlogged ground, and the Narthecio-Sphagnetum on valley-mire peat accumulated in elongated hollows. The clarity of this pattern, characteristic of the undulating sand and gravel landscapes of this part of Britain (Rose 1953) and described in detail from Cranesmoor by Newbould (1960), depends on the exact conformation of the ground and its hydrology: over generally less impeded surfaces, the drier elements in the sequence prevail; where wetter hollows predominate, the role of the Calluna- Ulex minor heath is much reduced and, in areas of complex topography, fine mosaics of the com munities can replace ordered zonations. Geological heterogeneity, too, can introduce additional variation in soils and vegetation: patches of less sharply-draining sands or clay-sands, for example, can weather to deep acid brown earths with a cover of the Pteridium-Galium community, and stretches of somewhat more fertile soils often have stands of the Ulex-Rubus scrub, as in the New Forest ‘brakes ’. Although burning and grazing play a crucial role in preserving the generally open character of this landscape, they can affect the soil-related pattern. Among the heaths, for example, such treatments can favour a general dominance throughout of Calluna, the abundance of which may swamp variation in the subordinate preferentials of the different communities; and certain regimes of burning and grazing may allow the replacement of the heaths by Nardo-Galion or Junco- Molinion grasslands or alter the balance between heather and bracken. Disturbance of the soils, as around settlements or plantations or along tracks, can also lead to a spread of Ulex-Rubus scrub within the Calluna- Ulex minor heath. Such sequences of heath communities, intermixed with bracken, gorse and acid grasslands, can still be seen, though not so extensively, around Poole Harbour, where the Calluna-Ulex minor heath is well represented in the Arne area, and on Iping Common in Sussex, Thursley, Hankley and Chobham Commons in Surrey (Ratcliffe 1977); at Ambersham Common and in Ash down Forest in Sussex, wetter heaths and mire tend to prevail, though in this part of Britain, the Ulex minor- Agrostis heath is absent, the Calluna-Ulex minor heath passing directly to the Ericetum tetralicis, sometimes with the Molinia sub-community as a transition zone. In many of these and other smaller sites in the south-east, too, the soil-related zonation is overlain by patterns resulting from the neglect of burning and grazing, and other traditional heathland treatments like the cutting of bracken for bedding and of gorse for fuel. In the rainier parts of The Weald, the Vaccinium sub-community is typical of such neglected dry heaths, with its tree seedlings able to get away quickly in less densely-shaded areas. The commonest woody invaders in such situations are birch, particularly B. pendula on these drier soils, and oak, generally Q. robur, though with Q. petraea locally important. Pines, particularly P. sylvestris, can also be very abundant where seed-parents are close and other colonisers include occasional Sorbus aucuparia and, particularly striking in ungrazed or unburned stands in the New Forest, Ilex aquifolium (Peterken & Tubbs 1965, Tubbs 1968). On some Surrey commons, Amelanchier lamarckii has become thor oughly naturalised among birch thickets developing among the Calluna-Ulex minor heath, easily overlooked in summer but very obvious in April with its lovely white flowers and again with its crimson autumn foliage. The immediate product of this kind of invasion is the characteristic ‘oak-birch heath ’ described from southhttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.046 Published online by Cambridge University Press388 Heaths east England (Tansley 1911, 1939, Wooldridge & Gold- ring 1953) which is actually open, immature Quercus- Betula-Deschampsia woodland, locally dominated in its early stages by patchworks of oak, birch, pine or holly, but showing considerable floristic continuity with the heath in its field layer, Calluna and U. minor persisting in more open areas, Pteridium, Deschampsia flexuosa and V. myrtillus maintaining high cover even under the deepening shade of the closing canopy. Oak is typically the eventual dominant in this kind of woodland which, even within the supposed natural range of beech (in which the Calluna-Ulex minor heath falls), often seems to have a stability of its own, perhaps not irrevocably yielding to the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland, even though this is often taken to be the natural climax on base-poor soils in this region. In fact, although young beech can sometimes be found in this community, and though this species can attain dominance by such invasion (as in some of the New Forest woodlands: Peterken & Tubbs 1965, Tubbs 1968), colonisation by Fagus is a sporadic and localised event, depending on the occurrence of good mast years in mature trees close to stands of the Calluna-Ulex minor heath (Watt 1923, 1924, 1925). Such a line of succession may thus often remain a theoretical pathway. Distribution "