"h20","Zonation and succession The Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath is typically found at the transition between the sub-shrub vegetation of the low-alpine zone and the moss-heaths and fell-field com munities of the higher slopes and summits of the mountains of north-west Scotland, the general zonation ref lecting the increased harshness of climate with the move to upper slopes. Local variations in exposure over the intermediate slopes commonly result in gradations from the community to wind-blasted heaths and snow-bed vegetation. The characteristic altitudinal pattern in which the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath occurs is well seen over the upper slopes of mountains like those of the Letter- ewe Forest, Beinn Dearg and Am Faochagach in Ross and Ben More Assynt and Foinaven in Sutherland, where the community occurs towards the lower limit of the Carex-Racomitrium heath. This vegetation is par ticularly extensive over the more rounded summits in the north-west Highlands, often as the distinctive Silene sub-community with its suite of cushion herbs, or in its Typical form with overwhelming dominance of Racomitrium, or grading into more open fell-field on active ablation surfaces. Floristic continuity between these kinds of vegetation and the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath is strong, with the Cetraria sub-community here looking very much like a sub-shrub facies of Typical Carex-Racomitrium heath: indeed in many situations, the former occurs as small patches in hollows or over blocky detritus among the lower reaches of the latter, picked out from a distance by the close canopy of E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum and V. myrtillus, but otherwise showing great qualitative similarity among the vascular associates and cryptogams. Usually, the hyp- noid mosses are more frequent in the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath and, of course, in the Rhytidiadelphus- Hylocomium sub-community, their abundance is very striking. Where this kind of vegetation replaces the Cetraria sub-community in mosaics of this sort, as can be seen on Ben Klibreck in Sutherland and locally elsewhere, the contrast between the elements of the pattern is that much greater. In other situations, the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath forms a more extensive zone below the summit vegetation, becoming especially prominent where the increase in slope is also marked by a shift to rough, bouldery ground on screes. Here, it can be seen as a transition to the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, the Hylocomium-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of which is very close in its general composition, but where there https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.064 Published online by Cambridge University PressH20 Vaccinium myrtillus-Racomitrium lanuginosum heath 569 is a move to more consistent eclipse of R. lanuginosum by the hypnaceous mosses with increased shelter and moisture. Alternatively, decreasing altitude can be marked by a replacement of the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath by sub-shrub vegetation in which Calluna plays a more prominent role. This can be seen over both sheltered and exposed slopes. In the former case, where a northerly or easterly aspect results in an especially cool, shady and humid environment, the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath is typically represented by the Bazzania-Mylia sub community and this usually passes to the Plagiothecium- Anastrepta sub-community of the Calluna-Vaccinium- Sphagnum heath at levels where the snow cover becomes less appreciable: bilbery and crowberry decrease in vigour with some slight shifts in the composition of the luxuriant hepatic mat that characterises both these vegetation types with the move to a less montane environment. In other places, where a drop in altitude is accompanied by increasing exposure to harsh winds that blow away any snow that does fall, the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath is replaced by the Calluna-Racomitrium heath. In general composition and physiognomy, these two are quite similar but the latter usually displays little contribution from V. myrtillus and the hypnoid mosses of the former have a limited role there. Nonetheless, the communities can come very close in their suites of vascular associates, especially where both extend to their lowest altitudes along the north-western seaboard of Scotland and on Skye, where the Viola-Thymus sub community here and the Festuca sub-community of the Calluna-Racomitrium heath show a floristic convergence. At higher altitudes in the hinterland of northwest Scotland, it is usually the Cetraria sub-community of the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath and the Empetrium sub-community of the Calluna-Racomitrium heath that occur together in these altitudinal zonations, sometimes with the Calluna-A. alpinus heath, another dwarfed sub shrub community of wind-blasted spurs, complicating the pattern, as on Foinaven. In the middle reaches of the low-alpine zone on such mountains, these vegetation types can be disposed not so much in an altitudinal pattern as in patchworks over the slopes reflecting retention of snow in less or more sheltered situations. The Calluna-Racomitrium and Cal luna-A. alpinus heaths represent the most exposed extreme at these levels, with the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath transitional to early snow-bed vegetation. Sometimes, indeed, it can be seen as a surround to more chionophilous communities, though it often forms an element of complex and extensive mosaics with, for example, certain kinds of Nardus-Carex vegetation. Patchworks of the Empetrum-Cetraria sub-community and the Cetraria sub-community of the Vaccinium- Racomitrium heath are especially well seen on the Letter- ewe Hills, the Affric-Cannich Hills, Foinaven, Beinn Dearg and Ben Klibreck, where sometimes quite gentle transitions between the components depend on the proportions of the sub-shrubs and Nardus against a ground of abundant R. lanuginosum with frequent hyp noid mosses and lichens. In some sites, other grassy chionophilous vegetation like the Deschampsia-Galium community, can also occur in these patterns with V. myrtillus and hypnoid mosses running on with some frequency and local abundance. Or there may be sharper transitions to late snow-bed communities. Distribution "