"h21","Zonation and succession The Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath is a very local sub-alpine element in the oceanic zonations characteristic of the north-west Highlands, grading above to more montane sub-shrub communities and moss-heaths, and often passing below to wet-heath and mire vegetation. At higher altitudes, variations in exposure and snow-lie affect the patterns of communities, while at lower elevations there is increased influence of burning and grazing. Floristically, the Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath is very close to certain kinds of woodland and, though there is rarely now any spatial continuity between the vegetation types, it is possible that clearance is responsible for their wide altitudinal separation, and that, in some situations, this is not a climax community. The usual approach to stands of the Calluna-Vacci- nium-Sphagnum heath is across tracts of Scirpus-Erio- phorum bog or, on higher altitude terraces, the Calluna- Eriophorum bog, with a zone of Scirpus-Erica wet heath marking the transition to the more steeply-sloping ground where the peat cover thins and becomes better drained. The boundary between this last vegetation type and the Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath running up on to the rocky ground in such zonations, is generally clear, particularly where large amounts of Molinia or Scirpus figure in the wet heath. In some cases, though, the communities can come quite close: the Vaccinium sub-community of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath has very frequent and sometimes prominent sub-shrubs and a ground layer in which hypnaceous mosses are as common and abundant as Sphagna, and it can grade fairly imperceptibly into the Calluna-Pteridium sub community here. Alternatively, there may be a transition zone of Typical Calluna-Erica heath between the ombrogenous vegetation and the Calluna-Vaccinium- Sphagnum heath. Such patterns are well seen around the base of the corries on An Teallach and on Foinaven (Ratcliffe 1977). In such situations, heather can remain a prominent feature of the vegetation cover to moderately high altitudes. On the shady and damp slopes where the Calluna-Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath is found, the community generally marks its upper limit of real vigour, increasing snow-lie over the higher talus and cliff bases being marked by a shift to the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath, the Bazzania-Mylia sub-community of which shares many of the same hepatics as the Mastigo- phora-Herbertus sub-community here. Laterally, both vegetation types may fragment over rocky ground, becoming restricted to ledges and crevices, or being replaced there by tail-herb vegetation of the Luzula- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.065 Published online by Cambridge University Press580 Heaths Vaccinium or Luzula-Geum communities, with the more species-poor examples of which these heaths show con siderable floristic continuity, among both the vascular associates and the bryophytes. Liathach and some of the Letterewe crags show this kind of feature. Towards these higher altitudes, variation in exposure becomes a major factor in determining the kinds of zonation in which the community is found. Over steep banks or in hollows where snow lies longer, the Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath can be replaced by the Hylocomium-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath or the Plagiothecium- Anastrepta sub-community of the Vaccinium-Rubus heath, in both of which there is a continuing strong contribution from hypnaceous mosses, with occasional, locally abundant Atlantic hepatics, beneath a bilberry or crowberry canopy. The transitions to the Vaccinium- Rubus heath can be especially smooth: indeed, McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) included some of this vegetation in their Vaccineto-Callunetum as a suecicosum facies. But the constancy of Cornus suecica and Rubus chamaemorus and occasional occurrence of Eriophorum vaginatum in the more chionophilous community will usually serve as a distinction and, though species such as A. orcaden- sis, Bazzania tricrenata and Diplophyllum albicans remain reasonably frequent, the integrity of the more strictly Atlantic assemblage becomes fragmented. The same is true of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, too, although additionally with the passage to this vegetation type, there is an increase in the frequency of grasses, notably Nardus, Agrostis canina, A. capillaris and F. ovina. This can presage a shift to the Nardus-Carex community of later snow-beds in which the hepatics are very fragmentarily represented. Mosaics of these vegetation types can be seen over the higher slopes of An Teallach and in the hills of the Letterewe and Monar Forests (Ratcliffe 1977). Some continuity among the hepatics can also be seen in those few places where the Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath is contiguous with the Calluna-Juniperus heath, a community best developed on cool, shady slopes of moderate altitudes where the ground is blown clear of snow in winter. It is especially associated with fields of frost-shattered Cambrian quartzite and is well seen on Foinaven around the steeper ground which has a mosaic of dry and damp heather vegetation (Ratcliffe 1977). Shifts from the sheltered slopes carrying the Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath on to ground which is much more exposed to strong winds usually see a sharp replacement of the community by such dwarfed sub shrub vegetation as the Calluna-Racomitrium or Cal luna-A. alpinus heaths, in which heather can attain considerably higher altitudes and where R. lanuginosum is the predominant component of the often extensive moss carpet. Such transitions can be seen over the windswept lips of corries and cliff ’s and over lateral transitions to exposed spurs, as on Foinaven (Ratcliffe 1977) and above the Enegars cliff ’s on Hoy (Prentice & Prentice 1975), where they can mark a shift to summit moss-heath and fell-field communities. Towards the upper end of its altitudinal limit, the Calluna-Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath appears to form a natural component of vegetation patterns controlled largely by variations in local climate and soils. On lower ground, however, it extends into the zone of communities that have often been strongly affected by various kinds of treatment. Where the surrounding heaths have been burned and grazed, for example, the transition to neighbouring communities is often sharpened up by a biotically-related dominance of heather in either the Calluna-Erica or Scirpus-Erica heaths or, conversely, by a virtual elimination of dwarf-shrubs in Nardo-Galion swards of various kinds, to which the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath can form an intermediate, or Molinia- dominated wet heath. Although the damp slopes over which the Calluna-Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath occurs are protected somewhat against the ravages of fire by the moistness of the ground and vegetation, it seems certain that the extent of the community has been fragmented and reduced by burning (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Ratcliffe (1968) suggested that its original range extended throughout the north-west Highlands, from Ben Hope in the far north to Glencoe and perhaps Ben Cruachan in Argyll, with widespread representation, too, from Jura and Mull right through the Hebrides and round to Orkney and Shetland, in many of which localities it is now extremely scarce or unknown. There is also the possibility that, before the extensive clearance that has characterised the western Highlands, the Cal luna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath could be found among tracts of native pine forest. There is considerable floristic similarity between the community and the field and ground layers of the Scapania sub-community of the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland, something that is seen very well in the upper reaches of the forest remnants of Coille na Glas-Leitire above Loch Maree, although here, as in other more fragmentary examples, there is now an altitudinal gap between the woodland and the heath in the higher corries above. Distribution "