"h22","Zonation and succession The Vaccinium-Rubus heath is a widespread but local element of the sub-alpine zone in altitudinal transitions throughout the central and north-west Highlands, grading below to sub-montane heaths and mires and passing above to low-alpine sub-shrub vegetation and lichen- or moss-heaths. The amount of local shelter and duration of snow-lie play an important part in determining the patterns at higher levels, and at lower altitudes treatments influence the zonations, though for the most part this vegetation can be considered a climax community. The general context of the Vaccinium-Rubus heath throughout its range is among the middle reaches of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, the major sub-shrub community of moist, base-poor soils at moderate to high altitudes through the cold and wet uplands. The two vegetation types come very close floristically and the former can be found as small patches in the latter or in more complex mosaics, the Vaccinium-Rubus heath picking out pockets of deeper, wetter peat on shadier slopes or where there is somewhat more prolonged snow-lie among the usually steeper and more rocky ground around (Figure 29). Species such as Blechnum, Cornus suecica, Plagiothecium undulatum, Sphagnum capillifolium, S. quinquefarium and Barbilophozia floer- kii occasionally find a place in the Hylocomium-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath but their increase in the shift to the Vaccinium- Rubus heath, and the additional appearance of Rubus chamaemorus, is usually quite marked. In the north-west Highlands, where the Plagiothecium-Anastrepta sub community is the usual representative of the Vaccinium- Rubus heath in such zonations, the pattern may be complicated by the occurrence also of the Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath. In its general floristics, this community falls somewhere between the other two heath types, having an extensive carpet of hypnaceous mosses and Sphagna, but usually lacking C. suecica and R. chamaemorus, but additionally, where it occurs over the shadiest and most humid north-or east-facing slopes, it has the best representation of all these vege tation types of Atlantic hepatics which helps give it a very distinctive appearance among these mosaics. In the north-west Highlands, these sub-alpine heaths often give way over the lower gently-sloping ground of the foothills, where the peats become thicker and less freely-drained, to mire vegetation, characteristically of the Scirpus-Eriophorum type at lower altitudes in this oceanic region. Frequently, there is an intervening zone of Scirpus-Erica wet heath, the Vaccinium sub-communhttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.066 Published online by Cambridge University Press588 Heaths ity of which, with its increased representation of sub shrubs and hypnaceous mosses, comes close in composition to the Vaccinium-Rubus heath. Patterns of this kind are especially typical of the lower slopes of Foina- ven and Ben More Assynt, An Teallach and the Affric- Cannich Hills (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). At higher altitudes in these parts of Scotland, the upward transition from the Vaccinium-Rubus heath is generally to sub-shrub vegetation in which Racomitrium lanuginosum plays an increasingly important part in the ground carpet. Over slopes that are not too exposed, the community usually passes above to the Vaccinium- Racomitrium heath, in some stands of which there is an especially marked continuation of the abundance of hypnaceous mosses characteristic of the Vaccinium- Rubus heath (the Rhytidiadelphus-Hylocomium sub community), in others a local richness in Atlantic hepatics, where snow cover accentuates the shelter provided by shady aspect (the Bazzania-Mylia sub community). Often, though, the decisive shift to dominance in the sub-shrub canopy of V. myrtillus and E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum in the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath is accompanied by an associated vascular Figure 29. Transitions to chionophilous and tail-herb vegetation around snow-bed and crags in a heath/mire sequence in the north-west Scottish Highlands. H10 Calluna-Erica heath H18 Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath H20 Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath H22 Vaccinium-Rubus heath M15 Scirpus-Erica wet heath M17 Scirpus-Er iophorum mire U10 Carex-Racomitrium moss-heath U16 Luzula- Vaccinium tail-herb community and cryptogam flora characteristic of the high montane moss-heaths, so the floristic transition is a clear one, with plants such as Carex bigelowii, Festuca ovina[ vivipara, Diphasium alpinum and Polytrichum alpinum all becoming very frequent among the Racomitrium carpet. Over more windswept brows above patches of Vaccinium-Rubus heath, provided these are not at too inhospitably montane an altitude, Calluna can continue its dominance in association with such an assemblage as this. Such Calluna-Racomitrium heath is typically blown clear of any winter snow and has a dwarfed and windtrimmed mat of heather, presenting a very different appearance from the vegetation of more sheltered situations below. Arctostaphylos uva-ursi and A. alpinus sometimes figure in this kind of transition too, with the distinct Calluna-A. alpinus heath being separable at some sites. The upper slopes of Foinaven and Ben More Assynt are again classic sites for this kind of zonation, with more fragmentary examples being seen in the Monar Forest, on Beinn Eighe and the Fannich Hills. With the geographical move towards the south-east part of the Scottish Highlands, where the Polytrichum- Galium sub-community becomes the more widespread kind of Vaccinium-Rubus heath, the more oceanic kinds of low-alpine moss-heaths are replaced almost entirely by analogous vegetation types in which there is a predominance of lichens associated with abundant heather or bilberry and crowberry. Complex intermediate kinds of zonation are to be seen on Ben Wyvis but, over the slopes of the Cairngorms and around Clova, in the heart of the Grampians, the shift in the vegetation types is complete, stands of Vaccinium-Rubus heath giving way to either the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath, over moderately sheltered and snow-bound slopes at higher https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.066 Published online by Cambridge University PressH22 Vaccinium myrtillus-Rubus chamaemorus heath 589 altitudes, with a decisive move to overwhelming lichendominance in the mat, or, where there is a stronger influence of bitter winds, to the Calluna-Cladonia heath, transitions to which can be a little more gradual. At lower altitudes, too, through the Central Highlands, the zonations tend to be different from those in the northwest, the sub-alpine belt of heaths passing over the foothills to Calluna- Vaccinium heath and/or Calluna-A. uva-ursi heath, both of these often treated as grousemoor in this part of Scotland. The other very important feature of the vegetation patterns in which the Vaccinium-Rubus heath is found relates to the influence of longer snow-lie in the sub alpine zone, because here, and particularly in the Grampians, the community occurs as a mildly chionophilous vegetation type, marking out hollows or sheltered lee slopes or, where there is late persistence of snow, forming a surround to the bed. Typically, in the latter situations, it gives way under the deepest and longest snow cover, to some type of Nardus-Carex vegetation, the Typical or Empetrum-Cetraria sub-communities of which, with their patchy abundance of hypnaceous mosses beneath a sparse cover of bilberry, show some continuity with the Vaccinium-Rubus heath. Generally, however, the great increase in abundance of Nardus itself and/or of C. bigelowii, with the local prominence of Scirpus cespitosus and chionophilous mosses such as Dicranum fuscescens and Kiaeria starkei, serves to dis tinguish the central zone. Such patches, fringed above by a narrow arch of Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath and then, on the exposed upper lip, by a strip of Calluna- Cladonia heath, the whole embedded in a tract of Calluna-Er iophorum mire or low-alpine heath, are very characteristic of the Cairngorms (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Even in such situations as these, there can be some influence on the vegetation pattern from grazing and burning which McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) suggested might facilitate the expansion of patches of Vaccinium- Rubus heath into a fringe of species-poor anthropogenic bilberry vegetation. And at lower altitudes, certainly, such treatments can greatly modify the context in which the community is found, burning of the drier sub-shrub vegetation tending to encourage the development of a patchwork of heather-dominated and impoverished heath, grazing tending to eliminate ericoids and transform the cover into first, a grassy heath of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia type, and then a Nardo-Galion sward. Distribution "