"h3","Zonation and succession The Ulex minor-Agrostis heath is typically found as part of soil-related sequences in which the degree of drainage impedence is the most important governing factor. Burning and grazing can modify these sequences and their intensity ultimately controls succession to woodland. Although such treatments continue in many stands, much heath vegetation of this kind has been lost by abandonment of tradition al land use and soil improvement for agriculture or forestry so surviving tracts can be much fragmented and sharply delineated from their surrounds. Over more extensive stretches of heathland vegetation in central southern England, as in the New Forest where burning and grazing still maintain suites of sub-shrub communities over mosaics of different soil types, the Ulex minor-Agrostis heath occupies a distinct position on ground that is too dry for the Ericetum tetralicis wet heath and too moist for the Calluna-Ulex minor dry heath. In the former direction, an increased tendency for seasonal surface waterlogging in mineral soils is marked by the virtual extinction of U. minor, E. cinerea and A. curtisii, except in places where slight soligenous influence ameliorates the lack of aeration. Calluna, Molinia and E. tetralix maintain their frequency with the passage to the Ericetum, the last species especially benefiting from reduced competition from other sub shrubs. On these moister soils, too, species such as Scirpus cespitosus and Narthecium ossifragum, which are very rare in the Ulex minor-Agrostis heath, begin to make a frequent appearance with Sphagnum compactum https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.047 Published online by Cambridge University PressH3 Ulex minor-Agrostis curtisii heath 395 and S. tenellum becoming common in the ground layer. Such transitions as this are best seen around the margins of the elongated hollows that have been eroded into the sands and gravels of this part of Britain, the zonation sometimes continuing downslope over permanently- waterlogged ground with accumulating peat into the Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bog. This is the kind of classic sequence described by Rose (1953) and New- bould (1960) and well shown around Cranesmoor, Denny, Wilverley and Holmsley bogs in the New Forest (Ratcliffe 1977). In the other direction, the move from gleyed podzols of various kinds on to sharply-draining humo-ferric podzols sees a disappearance from the vegetation of E. tetralix, Molinia and A. curtisii, with Calluna, E. cinerea and U. minor continuing and, together with Deschampsia flexuosa, making up the bulk of the cover of the Calluna-U. minor heath which terminates the sequence developed in relation to soil moisture. Away from the sharply-defined valley-mire hollows, the vegetation pat tern may be less well ordered and incomplete or with the drier or wetter elements prevailing according to local topography and hydrology. Over the landscape of the New Forest, for example, dry heath predominates over the well-drained slopes of Tertiary sands in the higher north-west with wetter heath restricted to ill-drained fragments of Plateau Gravel terraces; in the lower southern part of the area, damp heath is more abundant though most of the terraces are here better drained and have dry heath (Lambert & Manners 1964, Fisher 1915 a, b). And the pattern may be further complicated by the local pre-eminence of other edaphic factors where parent materials and soils change. Well-drained acid brown earths, for example, weathered from sandy or clay-sandy substrates, often have patches of the Pteri- dium-Galium community, and more fertile or disturbed ground, the Ulex-Rubus scrub, to which the Agrostis sub-community may grade, in the New Forest gorse ‘brakes ’. Although this part of Britain is quite exceptional in the extent to which it still retains large areas of these vegetation types disposed in extensive zonations, essentially the same mixture of communities is to be seen in the other major centre for the Ulex minor-Agrostis heath, around Poole Harbour. Here, on the Hartland- Arne and Studland-Godlingston heaths, originally con tinuous stretches of sub-shrub vegetation have been much fragmented (Moore 1962, Webb 1986), though there are the additional features of the presence of E. ciliaris in this and other communities and the striking juxtaposition of the heaths with open fresh-water and maritime vegetation types. In the long term, burning and grazing, which played a vital part in the development of this kind of open heath landscape, perhaps as early as the Mesolithic and cer tainly by the Bronze Age (e.g. Dimbleby 1962, Tubbs 1968, Haskins 1978, Webb 1986), are essential for its maintenance against succession to woodland. These treatments can confuse the soil-related boundaries between the heath types, as where burned or grazed areas cut across the major line of variation and favour the temporary expansion of some species common to more than one of the communities, such as E. cinerea or Molinia, or the more general long-term predominance of Calluna throughout. They can also mediate transitions to grasslands dominated by Molinia or A. curtisii, which can develop a stability of their own (e.g. Tubbs 1968). But their ultimate effect is repeatedly to set back invasion of trees, most characteristically on these soils both species of birch, Quer eus robur and Pinus sylvestris, the last often abundantly represented in plantations established among stands of the community. Succession has not been followed but is likely to result in the development of drier Betula-Molinia woodland, usually dominated by poorly-grown birch. Under the rather open canopy typical of this community, Molinia persists in abundance with A. curtisii less shade-tolerant, and sub-shrubs usually confined to gaps. Distribution "