"h4","Zonation and succession The U. gallii-Agrostis heath is typically found in zonations with other heath communities and mires over sequences of soils which differ mainly in their moisture regime, occasionally in their base-richness. The particular sub-communities, and the other vegetation types, involved in these patterns vary with altitude and are throughout subject to modification by treatments. Throughout most of its range, such human interference has maintained this vegetation against progression to woodland, though abandonment of traditional treatments has in recent years often been a prelude to improvement for agriculture or forestry with permanent loss of the community. In its typical lowland setting, best seen now on the Devonshire Pebble-Bed commons, from the largest of which, at Aylesbeare, the vegetation pattern was des cribed by Ivimey-Cook et al. (1975), the U. gallii- Agrostis heath is found in very much the same general kind of sequence as is characteristic of stretches of impoverished acid soils further east, around Poole, in the New Forest and on the commons of Surrey and Sussex. Essentially, it replaces the U. minor-Agrostis heath as the intermediate component of the zonation from dry to wet heath developed over soils with an increasing tendency to surface-waterlogging, except that, in the wetter climate typical of this more westerly region, the contribution of the dry heath becomes proportionately less prominent. Generally, at these lower altitudes, the U. gallii-Agrostis heath is represented by the Erica tetralix sub-community and, as in the Aylesbeare transect (Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975), this can occupy the bulk of the less waterlogged ground. Where more sharply-draining acidic soils are present, however, it gives way to drier heath of the Calluna-Ulex gallii type, a community into which Calluna, E. cinerea and U. gallii run as consistent components but from which E. tetralix, Molinia and usually also A. curtisii are excluded. In the opposite direction, the U. gallii-Agrostis heath gives way to some kind of Ericetum tetralicis with the move to mineral soils with seasonal surface waterlogging. Here, it is Calluna, E. tetralix and Molinia which provide the major continuity of cover, although A. curtisii, E. cinerea and U. gallii can run some way into the wet heath if soligenous influence, even gentle flushing, maintains good aeration. Such more gradual transitions can be seen to some extent at Aylesbeare (Ivimey- Cook et al. 1975) but they are more obvious at some of the sites included in the NCC Devon Heathlands Report (1980), at Hares Down, for example. In the full sequence of vegetation types in this kind of site (Rose 1953), the zonation usually continues over permanently-waterlogged peat into the Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bog and, over gently-undulating topography, the whole pat tern may be laid out as elongated, concentric zones. Often, however, the physiography is more complex than this and parent material heterogeneity can introduce further variations in the moisture or mineral regime. Commonly, as at Aylesbeare, there is some soligenous influence down the slopes such that Junco-Molinion vegetation intervenes through the zonation or, along soakways, the Schoenus-Narthecium mire can occur. And, as on heathlands in central southern England, deeper brown earth soils can have patches of the Pteri- dium-Galium community and on disturbed areas the Ulex-Rubus scrub. In such systems as these, the measure of base-enrichment is usually modest and dependent upon the con centration of sub-surface drainage waters from any local more calcareous substrates. On the Lizard, the U. gallii- Agrostis heath occurs in a rather different and peculiar situation, forming the most calcifuge element in a series of sub-shrub communities whose general character is controlled by the underlying serpentine and gabbro. Only where the dominating influence of these bedrocks is masked by acidic loess or Crousa Gravels are the soils sufficiently base-poor to support the U. gallii-Agrostis https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.048 Published online by Cambridge University PressH4 Ulex gallii-Agrostis curtisii heath 405 heath in this area, and from the deeper deposits, Erica vagans, the characteristic species through much of the Lizard heathland, is excluded. Around the thinner margins of the drift patches, however, it appears in a distinctive strip, usually 2-10 m wide, of the vegetation transitional to the E. vagans-Schoenus heath of the baserich gleys developed directly over the igneous parent materials (Coombe & Frost 1956tz, Hopkins 1983). On loess-contaminated brown earths, heath transitional to the other major sub-shrub community of the inland areas, the E. vagans-Ulex europaeus heath, can sometimes be found (Hopkins 1983). With the move to higher altitudes and a wetter climate, the Scirpus sub-community tends to replace the Erica sub-community and it can sometimes be found in the kind of dry-wet heath sequence typical of the lowlands, around the valley bogs of Dartmoor. On these upland fringes, however, there is a tendency for the whole character of the vegetation pattern to shift tow ards the sub-montane. In the first place, around the elongated topogenous hollows that drain radially across Figure 26. Zonations of heaths and mires on the lowland commons and moorland fringes of south-west England. H4c Ulex gallii-Agrostis heath, Erica sub-community H4d Ulex gallii-Agrostis heath, Scirpus sub-community H8b Calluna- Ulex gallii heath, Danthonia sub-community the fringes of Dartmoor, the Scirpus sub-community often gives way, on wetter ground, to some type of Scirpus-Erica wet heath or Junco-Molinion vegetation which then passes, in the water-tracks, to Carex echi- nata-Sphagnum mire, often rush-dominated. And, in the other direction, towards drier, sometimes rocky, ground, it is replaced by the Caluna-Vaccinium heath. Second, on a grander scale, the U. gallii-Agrostis heath makes a major contribution to the zone of marginal sub shrub vegetation that runs concentrically all around Dartmoor, grading above, through Scirpus-Erica wet heath to the Scirpus-Eriophorum blanket mire and pass ing below to Festuca-Agrostis grassland and improved pasture (Figure 26). Similar gross landscape patterns, though not so intact or clear, can be seen over the other major upland areas of the south-west, Bodmin Moor and Exmoor, and they reflect the tendency, in the more humid climate, for gentle slopes to accumulate a mantle of ombrogenous peat and for wet and dry heath to be pushed on to the steeper margins. But there is also a strong element of M15d Scirpus-Erica wet heath, Vaccinium sub-community Ml6a Ericetum tetralicis wet heath, Typical sub-community Ml7a Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, Drosera-Sphagnum sub-community M2 la Narthecio-Sphagnetum mire, Sphagnum- Rhynchospora sub-community M21a https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.048 Published online by Cambridge University Press406 Heaths cultural influence in the zonations, with sub-shrub vegetation becoming confined to a narrow belt of relatively unimproved land, edaphically impoverished and sometimes topographically intractable, above the limit of more intensive agriculture. Traditionally around these upland fringes, the heath zone has provided low-grade pasture, periodically renewed by burning, so it is often the Festuca sub-community that occurs in these kinds of zonations. And, in such situations, it is very obvious that grazing can mediate a conversion from U. gallii-Agrostis heath in which sub-shrubs predominate, through the grass-heath of this sub-community to calcifugous grassland of the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium type. The upland margins in the south-west often consist of ill-defined mosaics of these vegetation types (e.g. Ward et al. 1972«) and enclosures below frequently contain improved pas ture which has been derived from the heath and grassland by further treatment, liming, fertilising and top sowing, which can effect a fairly ready conversion to calcifuge types of Lolio-Cynosuretum. Injudicious graz ing can, however, create problems along the way, permitting the spread of Nardus stricta, for example, or Pteridium. On Dartmoor, the pasturing of the heaths by mixed herds of cattle, sheep and ponies may help keep these in check: ponies nibble out the centre of Nardus tussocks (Havinden & Wilkinson 1970) and cattle can trample out spreading bracken (Sayer 1969). Careless burning, too, can precipitate a run-down of the U. gallii-Agrostis heath. The spread of A. curtisii, a relatively unpalatable grass (Ivimey-Cook 1959, Ward et al. 1972«), is a common problem in newly-burned heaths, and with frequent fires it may become more or less permanently dominant in vegetation of the Agrostis- Erica type. In other cases, Molinia may become very abundant in a shift to Junco-Molinion vegetation. And, even where there is regeneration of the sub-shrubs, repeated burning can impoverish the cryptogam flora, and uncontrolled fires destroy the characteristic mosaic of dominance seen in well-managed swales. Through most of its range, however, burning and grazing have been essential to the maintenance of the vegetation against progression to woodland. Except in situations like the Lizard, where exposure to high and frequent winds is combined with a general scarcity of seed-parents, invasion of shrubs and trees occurs readily in the absence of treatments. Patchy development of the Ulex-Rubus scrub is often seen over disturbed ground in the U. gallii-Agrostis heath, along trackways, field margins and the edges of plantations, but of greater long-term significance is colonisation by birch which can fairly quickly form an open canopy to developing Betula-Molinia woodland. Very commonly, however, the abandonment of traditional treatments in the low lands has been followed eventually by improvement and conversion of the land to pasture or plantation.Distribution "