"h5","Zonation and succession The E. vagans-Schoenus heath forms a major component of the mosaic of sub-shrub communities and other https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.049 Published online by Cambridge University PressH5 Erica vagans-Schoenus nigricans heath 417 vegetation types developed on the Lizard in relation to variations in soil moisture, base-status and trophic level and the amount of salt-spray deposition. The pattern of past and present treatments often influences the effect of these factors; and burning and, to a lesser extent, grazing still also play a major role in maintaining the community in its typical form. One of the more gradual kinds of transitions is found where the soils retain the generally wet and base-rich character associated with the E. vagans-Schoenus heath, but seem to become somewhat more fertile with, in particular, increased availability of phosphate (Hopkins 1983), a feature which may reflect a switch in bedrock from serpentine to gabbro and somewhat less lengthy winter flooding, but which can also be associated with disturbance alongside walls, ditches and roadways. Then the community is replaced by the Molinia-Poten- tilla mire in which Schoenus can retain some representation, but where dominance shifts markedly to Molinia, with E. vagans, E. tetralix and U. gallii still present quite frequently but usually exceeded in abundance by U. europaeus, its bushes rooted in the often very large Molinia tussocks. Among the associates, such distinctive smaller herbs as Anagallis tenella, Carex pulicaris and Festuca ovina are usually overwhelmed by the accumulation of thick Molinia litter, and taller plants like Serratula and Succisa are replaced by Angelica sylvestris and Eupatorium cannabinum. In such vegetation on the Lizard (which Hopkins (1983) included within the E. vagans-Schoenus heath as a Ulex variant), the climate is sufficiently mild for Cladium to gain a local hold in sites which are flooded only for very brief periods, as in the Kynance valleys, on Goon- hilly Down and at Main Dale. Elsewhere, increased abundance and vigour of Cladium and the appearance of Phragmites on permanently-flooded soils along stream sides and in hollows marks a continuation of the zonation into sedge-dominated Phragmites-Eupatorium fen or Cladietum marisci swamp. In other places, the E. vagans-Schoenus heath grades more directly to fen vegetation through the Eleocharis sub-community, Phragmites becoming more abundant and vigorous in ungrazed transitions. Except where Cladium is over whelmingly dominant, the Molinia-Potentilla mire and fens of such sequences seem to be more susceptible to shrub invasion than the E. vagans-Schoenus heath itself, perhaps because of their more eutrophic soils and, in the absence of burning, they are readily colonised by Salix cinerea to form stands of the Salix-Galium woodland (Hopkins 1983). In other situations, the passage to the Molinia-Potentilla mire can denote a transition, over the lower flushed slopes of the shallow valleys that wind through the interior of the headland, to the E. vagans-Ulex heath, the community centred on the more free-draining base-rich brown earths of shedding ground on the serpentine and gabbro. In the Molinia sub-community of that kind of heath, typical of slightly gleyed profiles above the limit of seasonal inundation, Schoenus is reduced to low cover and Molinia, though abundant, is not strongly tussocky. In addition to E. vagans, E. tetralix and U. gallii remain frequent and Serratula tinctoria and Stachys betonica occur occasionally. But, again, U. europaeus becomes very common and prominent and, on the somewhat drier ground, there is an increase in E. cinerea and Calluna. Among the herbs, the appearance of Sangui- sorba officinalis and Viola riviniana is the most obvious indication of the switch from one community to another. This vegetation may in turn give way to Typical E. vagans-Ulex heath over free-draining brown earths with local patches of Ulex-Rubus scrub or Prunus scrub where freedom from burning has permitted invasion of other woody plants. By and large, it is through a zone of the E. vagans- Ulex heath that the E. vagans-Schoenus heath grades to the maritime Calluna-Scilla heath of the coastal cliff-top fringe. Locally, however, in very sheltered situations, the E. vagans-Schoenus heath can itself be found in cliff-top flushes, though it should be noted that such vegetation is different in composition from the Sc/zoeww^-dominated flushes found in exposed situations near the foot of cliffs on the Lizard: these are best placed in the Festuca- Daucus grassland. More frequent than transitions to drier, base-rich soils, many of which, at least on the gabbro, are now cultivated and thus marked by an abrupt switch to improved grassland, are zonations to the base-poor and somewhat better-drained profiles developed from the loess and Crousa Gravels which are superimposed over the ultrabasic bedrocks. Characteristically, such soils are occupied by the Ulex gallii-Agrostis heath which thus forms irregular patches on the gentle interfluves of the peninsula, surrounded and broken up by stretches of the E. vagans-Schoenus heath. Over the margins of less well-defined areas of superficials, where the cover thins gradually or where loess or gravel has been mixed with the underlying base-rich parent material in bouts of past cultivation, the transition between the two heath types is correspondingly indistinct with E. vagans, Serratula and Sanguisorba officinalis running into the U. gallii-Agrostis heath in a marginal zone 2-10 m wide (Hopkins 1983). In other cases, steeper-edged banks of loess or gravel show an abrupt replacement of the one heath by the other, E. vagans and Schoenus both disappearing, together with most of their herbaceous associates, E. cinerea, Calluna and Agrostis curtisii increasing in fre quency and cover to become co-dominant with the E. tetralix, U. gallii and Molinia. This basic soil-related pattern has been affected by treatments in a variety of ways. Some activities, strongly controlled by the natural drainage quality or fertility of the ground, have had a more ordered impact which has https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.049 Published online by Cambridge University Press418 Heaths often confirmed the edaphic influence, as in the case of ‘turf ’ stripping, largely confined to the humic stagno- gleys of the serpentine and gabbro, or the primitive shifting cultivation of the past which seems to have been concentrated on the thinner deposits of loess and over the more nutrient-rich brown earths on the gabbro. Enclosure for grazing and the present pattern of burning, on the other hand, cut across the edaphic boundaries, so their effects can confuse the zonations described above. Fires, for example, particularly severe summer burns, can impose a structural uniformity within a tract of heathland, whose soil-related mosaic may take some years to grow out again. Within the communities of wetter soils here, Molinia is the plant likely to become temporarily dominant across such boundaries following fires, though on the poorer soils its vigour is reduced. Burning, with subsequent severe grazing, especially on more eutrophic soils or ones enriched with fertilisers, is likely to convert the E. vagans-Schoenus heath (and wetter stands of the E. vagans-Ulex and U. gallii- Agrostis heaths) into Molinia-Potentilla mire. For the most part, however, burning, sometimes combined with grazing in the enclosures, has the effect of maintaining the different sub-shrub communities in a complex patchwork of vegetation in various stages of cyclical regeneration. Except on the most infertile soils, such treatments probably play some part in setting back the invasion of shrubs and trees though, over much of the headland, the scarcity of seed-parents and exposure to severe winds militate against rapid development of scrub and woodland. On the wetter soils, the natural eventual successor to the E. vagans-Schoenus heath is probably Salix-Galium woodland or Salix-Betula- Phragmites woodland; on seasonally-waterlogged pro files, some kind of Betula-Molinia woodland seems a likely development. Distribution "