"h6","Zonation and succession The community occurs in mosaics and zonations in the open and enclosed heaths of the Lizard where transitions can be related to variations in soil moisture, basestatus and trophic level and the amount of salt-spray deposition. The effects of burning and, to some extent, grazing are superimposed on to these patterns and, except in extreme edaphic and climatic conditions, these factors probably play an important part in maintaining the sub-shrub vegetation against successional change. The floristic contrasts between the two major kinds of E. vagans heath, the E. vagans-Ulex and the E. vagans- Schoenus types, developed in relation to the degree of drainage impedence in base-rich soils, is sometimes expressed as a zonation between the communities, over ground that becomes more gently sloping and more prone to seasonal waterlogging within the shallow drainage basins and over the undulating surface of the plateau itself. In such situations, the Molinia sub community of the E. vagans-Ulex heath may form a transition zone between the vegetation types, E. tetralix and Molinia appearing first, then Schoenus increasing in frequency, but U. europaeus maintaining its cover quite well. Then, with the move into the E. vagans-Schoenus heath, the latter fades, together with many of the attendant herbs, and Schoenus and Molinia begin to show the strongly-tussocky structure typical of seasonally-inundated ground, E. cinerea and Calluna becoming confined to the tussocks and the runnels developing their characteristic rich flora. Sometimes, where there is a switch from serpentine to gabbro or in sites where there has been some disturbance, the Molinia-Potentilla mire may occur within such sequences. In such veg etation, Molinia is strongly dominant over the somewhat more fertile soils, but Schoenus can be found occasionally and both E. vagans and U. europaeus can occur rooted in the tussocks. Separating this kind of vegetation from transitional heath stands can present some difficulties. The other quite common type of gradual zonation occurs where the base-rich parent materials which give rise to the free-draining brown earths supporting E. vagans-Ulex heath are overlain by banks of acid loess. Where contamination with such aeolian material is only slight, the Agrostis sub-community is characteristic but this can give way to U. gallii-Agrostis heath over deeper deposits. Then E. vagans peters out fairly quickly, U. europaeus becomes confined to disturbed areas and the fairly rich assemblage of associates is replaced by a restricted suite of more calcifugous plants. Neither the U. gallii-Agrostis nor the E. vagans- Schoenus heaths are often found running continuously up to the maritime heath zone of the Lizard because the soils of which they are most characteristic are mainly confined to the inner parts of the peninsula. On more fertile gabbro and schist soils, moreover, the maritime sequence is often truncated above the Calluna-Scilla heath by cultivated land bounded by an enclosure wall. On the serpentine, however, where the soils are more oligotrophic, the zonation can run uninterrupted from https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.050 Published online by Cambridge University Press428 Heaths the maritime heath on to the plateau. In such transitions, which are especially well developed on the more exposed west coast of the Lizard and, more locally, around the cove valleys, the E. vagans-Ulex heath typically occupies a position inland of the Calluna-Scilla heath. E. vagans, which is mildly salt-tolerant, can extend some way in to the Viola sub-community of the maritime heath, though the gorse spp., particularly U. europaeus, become much patchier with increasing exposure until eventually it is Calluna and E. cinerea that are providing the bulk of an often stunted and wind-pruned sub-shrub cover. But, apart from the appearance of Plantago maritima, there is considerable continuity between the herbaceous ele ment of the Festuca sub-community of the E. vagans- Ulex heath, the usual cliff-top type, and the Viola sub community of the Calluna-Scilla heath, with species like Festuca ovina, Scilla verna, Viola riviniana, Carexflacca, C. caryophyllea, Polygala vulgaris, Koeleria macrantha, Plantago lanceolata, Hypochoeris radicata, Lotus corni- culatus and Thymus praecox all occurring in both. Genista pilosa can be quite a good marker of the transition and both Coombe & Frost (1956a) and Hopkins (1983) used this species to name the vegetation of this intermediate zone. Where the zonation continues inland from the E. vagans- Ulex heath into the E. vagans- Schoenus and U. gallii-Agrostis types, the sequences constitute some of the most extensive and valuable tracts of coastal sub-shrub vegetation that we have. On the rocky cliff tops, where parching of the soils in spring and summer, inherent infertility, exposure to wind and grazing all contribute to the inhospitable character of the environment, the Festuca sub-community may represent a natural climax kind of E. vagans- Ulex heath (Hopkins 1983). In other situations, how ever, it is burning and grazing which ultimately maintain the vegetation as a plagioclimax, though the poor quality of the serpentine soils and the shortage of seed parents over much of the headland would probably make succession to scrub slow. As noted above, older stands of the community do show some transitional features to Ulex-Rubus or Prunus scrubs, though Coombe & Frost (1956a) considered that progression from heath to the latter was not clearly supported by field evidence. Distribution "