"h7","Zonation and succession The Calluna-Scilla heath is characteristically found in zonations developed over maritime cliffs in relation to gradients of salt-spray deposition and soil moisture, themselves complex functions of exposure and cliff physiography. Bedrock type also has an important influence on soil development, the disposition and character of the profiles, and these factors, together with regional variations in climate, affect the vegetation sequences. Grazing can alter zonations and, together with exposure, may prevent successional change. Agricultural improvement, particularly around our southern https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.051 Published online by Cambridge University Press440 Heaths coasts, has often abruptly truncated the zonations inland, sometimes totally obliterating the heath zone. Except over limestones, from which the Calluna- Scilla heath is usually absent and where ericoid veg etation of any kind is typically limited to drift-contaminated slopes set back some way from the sea, the community forms the inner limit of maritime vegetation. Generally speaking, in the southern part of Britain, where grazing is light or absent, it is replaced to seaward by the Festuca-Holcus grassland, which can experience up to twice as much salt-spray deposition. Over basic bedrocks, as on the serpentine, gabbro and hornblende schists of the Lizard and on basalt or calcareous mudstones and shales in Dyfed, Gwynedd, Cumbria and Galloway & Dumfries, the Calluna-Scilla heath is typi cally represented by the Viola sub-community over soils which are reasonably deep and moist. To seaward, over more exposed and shallower profiles, this passes to the Dactylis sub-community of the Festuca-Holcus grassland or, where soil moisture is maintained, as over north-facing slopes for example, to the Primula sub community. The seaward limit of the heath is usually well marked by the edge of the sub-shrub canopy but, where the wind keeps this very low, the boundary may be scarcely visible from a distance except as a slight tonal difference. And, of course, there is considerable floristic continuity through species like Festuca rubra, Holcus lanatus, Plantago lanceolata, P. maritima, Lotus cornicu- latus, Scilla verna, Daucus carota ssp. gummifer, Hypochoeris radicata, and Viola riviniana. Within the heath zone itself, there is often a mosaic over more base-rich soils between the Viola sub community and the Armeria type according to the distribution of deeper and shallower profiles (Figure 27). And where rock outcrops break the mantle, the zonation may continue to the Armeria-Cerastium community, where the sub-shrubs and mesophytic herbs disappear and therophytes and succulents become pro minent. These vegetation types can also form a more ordered zonation running down cliffs where the soils become progressively discontinuous but, in complex topography, it may be very difficult to demarcate their limits. In this southern part of Britain, the sequence of Figure 27. Zonations on the less exposed tops of maritime cliffs on (a) more basic bedrock in the southwest of Britain, with enclosure for agriculture behind, (b) more acidic bedrock in southern Britain with light grazing, (c) more acidic bedrock in northern Scotland with heavier grazing. H7a Calluna-Scilla heath, Armeria sub-community H7b Calluna-Scilla heath, Viola sub-community H7c Calluna-Scilla heath, Erica sub-community H7d Calluna-Scilla heath, Empetrum sub-communityH7e Calluna-Scilla heath, Calluna sub-community H8d Calluna-Ulex gallii heath, Scilla sub-community M15c Scirpus-Erica wet heath, Cladonia sub-community MC9b Festuca-Holcus grassland, Dactylis sub-community MC9c Festuca-Holcus grassland, Achillea sub-community MC 10b Festuca-Plantago grassland, Carex sub-community MC9b MCI OffM15c(c) https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.051 Published online by Cambridge University PressH7 Calluna vulgaris-Scilla verna heath 441 communities is often terminated landwards at the level of the Calluna-Scilla heath by the boundary of the improved cliff-top grassland but, in a few places, the zonation continues inland to non-maritime heaths. The most extensive patterns of this kind are to be seen on the Lizard, though they are of a rather unusual type because of the local importance there of E. vagans. This, together with occasional U. europaeus, can run into the Viola sub community a little way but, on the free-draining, baserich brown earths of the cliff-top slopes and around the cove valleys, these two sub-shrubs become co-dominant above the Calluna-Scilla zone in the E. vagans-Ulex heath. Over the Lizard hinterland, this then gives way to the E. vagans-Schoenus heath over base-rich gleys or the U. gallii-Agrostis heath on base-poor, free-draining soils over acidic superficials. Essentially similar patterns of Festuca-Holcus grassland, Calluna-Scilla heath and inland heath can be seen over ungrazed cliffs cut into neutral or acid bedrocks which are of widespread occurrence up the west coast of Britain but particularly important on Land ’s End, where granite occurs, on the north Cornish and Dyfed coasts, where sandstones and shales crop out, and in Anglesey with its Pre-Cambrian rocks. Here, the Cal luna sub-community is the usual Calluna-Scilla heath of deeper, free-draining soils, passing seawards into the Achillea or Plantago sub-communities of the Festuca- Holcus grassland, the sub-shrubs again fading at the transition but Festuca rubra, Holcus lanatus, Plantago spp., Scilla verna, Rumex acetosa and Potentilla erecta continuing throughout. Again, the Armeria sub community can occur patchily within the Calluna type on areas of shallower soil and mark a transition to the Armeria-Cerastium therophyte vegetation, or form a seaward transition to this or Festuca-Armeria grassland. Landward continuations are once more rare but, in some localities, the sequence passes into the Scilla sub community of the Calluna-U. gallii heath. Where such southern zonations are subject to grazing, the basic pattern of heath and grassland remains, though heavy herbivore pressure may reduce the height of the sub-shrubs further, making the boundary even harder to see, or actually move it inland somewhat where palatable species, notably Calluna, are eaten out completely. Also, the Festuca-Holcus grassland is often represented just by the Plantago sub-community or is totally replaced by the Festuca-Plantago grassland, the abundance of Plantago spp. running into the heath. In northern Britain, where grazing is more widespread, this kind of pattern is very common, the Festuca- Plantago grassland occupying the bulk of the more accessible cliff slopes with its Armeria, Carex and Schoenus sub-communities distributed according to decreasing maritime influence and increasing soil moisture. Any of these can grade into the Calluna-Scilla heath above, though in this region, of course, the sub-communities tend to be different: on drier, shallower soils the Calluna type is characteristic, the Empetrum on somewhat deeper mineral profiles and the Erica on wet mineral soils or peat. All these kinds of Calluna-Scilla heath persist on ungrazed cliffs in the north, though the Calluna sub-community seems particularly common there and, with relaxation of herbivore pressure, the Festuca-Plantago grassland tends to be replaced by the Festuca-Holcus grassland, often in this part of Britain by the Anthoxanthum sub-community, an abundance of Nardo-Galion herbs running throughout. Once more, on both grazed and ungrazed cliffs, the Armeria sub community of the Calluna-Scilla heath can mark shal lower soils under strong maritime influence though it tends to be scarce in the wet climate. And the Viola sub community is likewise rather local, picking out areas of mull soils over more base-rich substrates. Although, in some parts of Scotland the typical southern pattern of enclosure to the cliff edge is quite common, in the west, the Calluna-Scilla heath is often contiguous with inland semi-natural vegetation which, in the wet climate of this part of Britain, is usually Ericion tetralicis wet heath or Erico-Sphagnion blanket mire on peats which thicken up to a continuous deep mantle on inland slopes. Typically, the Erica or, on drier ground, the Empetrum, sub-community of the heath grades to the Scirpus-Erica wet heath or the Scirpus- Eriophorum bog, the various sub-shrubs maintaining their cover but the herbaceous component of the heath passing to a Molinia or Sczrpws-dominated suite of associates. On steeper ground where, even in this humid climate, the peat mantle has not been able to accumulate, the Calluna sub-community of the heath usually passes to Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland devoid of sub-shrubs and maritime species. In sheltered situations on the upper reaches of cliffs, particularly in the south, the Calluna-Scilla heath can give way laterally to bracken or scrub, often with a fringe of the Festuca-Hyacinthoides grassland or rank Arrhenatheretum, and such vegetation often runs inland through the heath zone up head-filled gullies. The main woody colonisers in such situations are U. europaeus on drier, more acidic soils and Prunus spinosa on moister mulls and, where exposure is not too severe, grazing may play some part in preventing these species gaining a hold in the Calluna-Scilla heath. In many cases, however, susceptibility to even small amounts of salt-spray hinders their invasion into the community, so over much of its range this vegetation can be considered a climatic climax. Distribution "