"h8","Zonation and succession The Calluna-U. gallii heath is found in diverse kinds of zonations and mosaics with other vegetation types in relation to differences in the moisture content, base richness and trophic state of the soils, and to variation in local climatic conditions, most strikingly maritime influence. Burning and grazing can modify these pat terns but they also produce effects of their own, being responsible in most situations for the maintenance of the vegetation against succession to woodland. Reclama tion of land for improved agriculture has left many stands as fragments in pastoral landscapes. Towards the south-western part of its range, the community can occur as the dry-heath component in the characteristic sequences of sub-shrub vegetation developed over acidic soils with varying degrees of drainage impedence. Essentially, it replaces the Calluna-U. minor heath on the free-draining profiles in such zonations in the region to the west of the Poole basin, which marks the general divide between the ranges of U. minor and U. gallii (Proctor 1965). In full sequences of this type, the Calluna- U. gallii heath gives way, over gleyed podzols and stagnogleys, developed where an argillic B horizon or iron pan impedes drainage, to the U. gallii-Agrostis heath. U. gallii, E. cinerea and Calluna all run on, often in considerable abundance, into this community, but the junction between the two is usually marked by the consistent appearance of E. tetralix, Molinia and A. curtisii, which typically share dominance with them. In other cases, where there is a more sudden switch to mineral soils that are strongly seasonally waterlogged, the zonation can pass directly to some kind of Ericetum tetralicis. In this kind of wet heath, E. cinerea is scarce and U. gallii generally confined to sites with some through-put and aeration, so the junction is often quite clearly marked with a shift in dominance to Calluna, E. tetralix and Molinia. In fact, within the tracts of heaths in south-western Britain, the Calluna-U. gallii type occupies a relatively small proportion of the ground, even where more free- draining soils are quite extensive. On the Devonshire Pebble-Bed commons, for example, where gently-dissected Triassic deposits form an undulating dip slope (Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975), on the Devon and Gower commons over Carboniferous deposits (NCC Devon Heathland Report 1980, NCC Gower Common unpublished data) and in Pembrokeshire, where suites of sub shrub communities occur on the plateau cut into Cambrian and Ordovician rocks (NCC Pembrokeshire Heaths Report 1981), this community is rather poorly represented. This is partly because, with the increasing wetness of the climate in moving to the west and into the upland fringes, the damper kinds of heath are able to extend much further on to the free-draining profiles kept continually moist by high precipatiomevaporation ratios. Often, then, it is the U. gallii-Agrostis heath that occupies the brown podzolic soils or podzols or, beyond its range, some drier kind of Ericetum tetralicis, with the Calluna-U. gallii heath confined to small stands over knolls and around rock outcrops. Even where tracts of dry heath could be potentially more extensive, the free- draining soils on lowland commons have often been the focus of past disturbance or cultivation, such that they now support Ulex-Rubus scrub or Pteridium-Galium vegetation. Even where the effects of human activity have not https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.052 Published online by Cambridge University PressH8 Calluna vulgaris-Ulex gallii heath 453 been so gross as this, treatments can mask the contribution of the Calluna- U. gallii heath to zonations such as these. Where burning occurs, for example, swales often cut across the soil-related boundaries and develop a temporary prominence of regenerating U. gallii or E. cinerea, or an eventual dominance of Calluna, which masks variation in the associated floras of the different constituent heaths. In other cases, burning can be followed by a great expansion in the cover of A. curtisii or Molinia, centred on the moister soils, but often extending on to the more free-draining profiles: extensive, fire-climax stands of Molinia-Potentilla grassland are a marked feature among heath sequences in lowland western Britain. Grazing may contribute to the maintenance of this kind of rank species-poor sward by helping keep the various regenerating sub-shrubs in check but frequently, in zonations of this kind, it produces a different kind of convergence among the associated herbaceous floras of the various heaths, to form extensive stretches of fairly uniform, close-cropped grassland. In the south-west, the most widespread kinds of Cal- luna-U. gallii heath are the Danthonia and Vaccinium types, the former especially on warmer and drier slopes, the latter in moister, cooler situations. These vegetation types already show a strong measure of floristic continuity in their herbs with some of the damper heaths, particularly the Festuca sub-community of the U. gallii- Agrostis heath and the Succisa-Carex sub-community of the Ericetum tetralicis. The effect of grazing over the boundary between the former and the Calluna- U. gallii heath is well seen in the sequence of heaths and grassheaths described from the Dartmoor fringes by Ward et al. (1972«) and some perplexing intermediates between the Calluna- U. gallii heath and the Ericetum are to be seen on certain Pembrokeshire heaths (NCC Pembrokeshire Heaths Report 1981). The floristic character of the swards derived by graz ing the heath vegetation of the Danthonia and Vaccinium sub-communities places them firmly within the Nardo- Galion: they are characterised by mixtures of such grasses as Agrostis capillaris, A. canina ssp. montana, Festuca ovina, F. rubra, Anthoxanthum odoratum, Dan thonia decumbens, Nardus stricta with Carex pilulifera, Potentilla erecta and Galium saxatile, that is, exactly the herbaceous element of the runnels between the sub shrubs in the heath itself. Grazing can mediate every gradation between the extremes of dense heath on the one hand and continuous grassy sward on the other, and is the major factor controlling the other common kind of zonation in which the community is found: heath/ grassland mosaics over stretches of more or less uniformly free-draining acid soil. These are a particularly characteristic feature of poorer-quality grazing land over acid rocks and superficials around the upland fringes, where the bulk of the sward can usually be referred to some kind of Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grass land and where the heath forms patches of varying size and organisation over rocky knolls, around field margins and in neglected corners, sometimes even forming hedgerow vegetation on top of inaccessible earth banks. Improvement of the pasture by the application of farmyard manure (or, perhaps, simply a switch from sheep to cattle as the grazing stock) may succeed in converting the sward to a more mesophytic kind, and use of chemical fertilisers, with top-sowing, can readily effect a full transformation to the Lolio-Cynosuretum. Towards the limit of in-by land in farms along the margins of Dartmoor and the Welsh upland, such pasture is the frequent context for remaining fragments of the Calluna-U. gallii heath. Variations in base-richness, as well as in the trophic state of the soils, can produce a further element of complexity in these grazing-related sequences over free- draining profiles. As noted earlier, the community can occur over calcareous substrates where these are mantled by a cover of pervious, more base-poor superficials and on sites like the Mendip (Hope-Simpson & Willis 1955), the South Gower coast (NCC South Gower Coast Report 1981) and the Great Orme in Gwynedd (Rodwell 1974), the Calluna-U. gallii heath serves as one effective marker of the location of brown earths derived from patches of exotics such as loess or aeolian sand deposited and retained over gentler slopes (Smithson 1953, Perrin 1956, Ball 1960, Findlay 1965; see also Pigott 1962, 1970«). Typically, in such sites, the heath is surrounded by a calcicolous sward, in this case, the Festuca-Avenula grassland, developed over thin, dry and highly calcareous rendzina soils on the native limestone, and, where the patches of superficials are sharply defined, there can be an abrupt switch from this to the Danthonia sub-community of the heath: this kind of pattern can sometimes be seen where the exotic parent materials have filled up crevices, together with long- weathered and decalcified limestone debris, in the underlying rock surface. Often, however, there is a gradual transition from the rendzinas to the brown earths, with a continuous increase in the soil depth and in the proportion of non-native parent materials, pro ducing some very interesting zonations from the calcicolous sward through to the heath. It is in such situations that the Sanguisorba sub-community occurs as an intermediate between the two, sometimes grading directly to the Festuca-Avenula grassland, in other cases showing a further transitional zone which can be classified within the Festuca-Agrostis grassland. Mixtures of calcicoles and calcifuges are characteristic of this intermediate kind of vegetation, together with some other species such as Stachys betonica, Hypericum pulchrum and, in Wales and Derbyshire, Viola lutea (Balme 1953, 1954, Pigott 1962, Grime 1963«, b). The term ‘limestone heath ’ is often used to describe it, or part of it, but it should be noted that such transitional vegetation can https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.052 Published online by Cambridge University Press454 Heaths occur in zonations and mosaics between other constituent grasslands and heaths. The clarity of such pat terns, though ultimately dependent upon the edaphic variation, is also much affected by the grazing intensity: relaxation allows most of the calcicolous plants to be overwhelmed by coarse grasses of broad ecological tolerance and perhaps permits an expansion of the sub shrubs on to somewhat more base-rich soils which they can acidify (e.g. Grubb et al. 1969). One further environmental variable, which can exert a controlling influence on zonations involving the Cal luna-U. gallii heath, is salt-spray deposition. Over tracts of pervious, acidic rocks and superficials, the improvement of deeper profiles has been so extensive that, in some parts of south-west Britain, the community is now confined to the unenclosed fringe of land along the cliff tops, where it is represented by the Scilla type. However, as mentioned earlier, it is only on those parts of cliffs which are reasonably sheltered from salt-laden winds that even this kind of sub-shrub vegetation can survive and quite commonly it represents the limit of the seminatural zonation, being terminated abruptly above by a field boundary with improved pasture or arable beyond. To seaward, where heath vegetation runs on into the more maritime zone, there is a transition to the Calluna- Scilla heath: typically, over more acidic soils, this is of the Calluna sub-community, from which U. gallii is absent and where Armeria maritima and Plantago cor- onopus occasionally figure, but which otherwise shows considerable continuity in its floristics, something which is readily seen where the sub-shrub element is reduced by exposure to winds to a very short mat through which the herbs inter-pene träte. Beyond this, the sequence can continue through maritime grasslands of the Festuca- Holcus and Festuca-Armeria types, with the Festuca- Plantago grassland becoming prominent where grazing is particularly heavy and then to maritime crevice com munities. Throughout, the zonation can be interrupted by patches of the Armeria-Cerastium vegetation over rock outcrops or ant-hills, whose flora can show some continuity with the heath through species such as Jasione montana and Air a praecox. Such sequences are especially characteristic of the Cornish granite, the sandstones and shales of the north Cornish coast and Dyfed and the Anglesey Pre-Cambrian cliffs. In certain areas, the Scilla sub-community is open to grazing stock though, within the range of the Calluna- U. gallii heath, it is frequently beef cattle rather than sheep that are turned on to sea-cliffs and their less assiduous cropping does not have such a marked effect on the vegetation. But, even without such treatment, the invasion of shrubs and trees into this kind of Calluna-U. gallii heath is probably much hindered by exposure to wind and modest amounts of salt-spray and it can perhaps be considered a climax vegetation. In more sheltered situations, episodes of heavy grazing with scuffing of the ground or fires can both open up the ground in the short term and allow establishment of seedlings but, for shrubs and trees to get away, such treatments must then be withdrawn. Successions have not been followed in any detail but the most likely woody invaders on the more base-poor soils are birch and oak (with a tendency for Betula pubescens and Quercus petraea to be pre-eminent in the areas of wetter climate), with Pinus sylvestris able to seed in from plantations, and Sorbus aucuparia and Ilex aquifoliunv. such developments would be expected to culminate in Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland. Where the pro files are not so acid, impoverished or excessively draining, it is possible that thorn scrub might develop as a precursor to more mixed oak-birch woodland of the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus or Quercus-Betula-Oxalis types. Along such a successional line, the early establishment of Ulex-Rubus or Pteridium-Rubus underscrub may be of considerable importance in breaking the dominance of the calcifuge sub-shrubs and initiating some measure of soil enrichment. Disturbance could provide the initiating step in such a process and the presence of fragmentary scrubby woodland around abandoned settlements and wartime emplacements bears some testimony to this. Where Pteridium is locally established, however, any opening of the heath canopy, either by disturbance or by degeneration of the bushes, may allow it to pre-empt the ground forming dense bracken stands. Distribution "