"m1","Zonation and succession On more featureless mires, the Sphagnum auriculatum community can contribute to ill-defined areas of wetter vegetation (e.g. Newbould 1960, Goode & Lindsay 1979, Boatman et al. 1981), but it is best developed as the pool and wet hollow component in certain patterned Erico-Sphagnion mires where it grades, with increasing height above the water-table, to flat and hummock vegetation. There is only limited evidence that such mosaics represent a full regenerative sequence of alternating pools and hummocks. Throughout western Britain, the community is found most consistently within the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, on domed or slightly sloping areas within blanket mire or in areas which bear a more obvious resemblance to raised mire. Where surface patterning is pronounced, it passes, round the margins of pools and wetter hollows to the Drosera-Sphagnum sub-community of the mire proper, with a switch in the Sphagnum carpet from S. auriculatum and S. cuspidatum to S. papillosum, S. subnitens and S. tenellum (and, locally, S. magellanicum) and thence to S. capillifolium. Drosera rotundifolia and, more locally, D. anglica run some way into this transitional vegetation, Narthecium and Eriophorum angustifolium much further; and there is a substantial increase in Molinia and Erica tetralix and an appearance of Erio- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.005 Published online by Cambridge University PressMl Sphagnum auriculatum bog pool community 49 phorum vaginatum and Scirpus cespitosus. Mixtures of these species continue on as vascular dominants of the Cladonia sub-community of the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire which typically makes up the vegetation cover of the hummock sides and tops in such systems. The vertical stratification of the major species in relation to water-table is well seen in profiles from the Silver Flowe mosses (Ratcliffe & Walker 1958) and Kentra Moss (British Ecological Society Mires Group unpub.). On degraded blanket mires in western Britain, fragmentary Sphagnum auriculatum pools may persist in the Juncus- Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire. On moving further east in Scotland, where the Erica-Sphagnum mire replaces the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire on lowland raised bogs, the Sphagnum auriculatum bog pool is replaced by the Sphagnum cuspidatum!recurvum type, and intermediate stands may be encountered in the transitional zone. In southern lowland valley bogs, the Sphagnum auri culatum community occupies an analogous position in patterned Narthecio-Sphagnetum mire, though here hummock-hollow systems tend to be less well defined and there is the complication of soligenous influence along the axes and around the margins of the bogs. Also, Sphagnum capillifolium and Eriophorum angustifolium play a less prominent role in the drier elements of the vegetation than to the north-west. But, these things apart, the general pattern is the same: typically, the community gives way to the Sphagnum-Rhynchospora sub-community of Narthecio-Sphagnetum mire, S. papillosum, S. tenellum and S. subnitens increasing their cover and Molinia, Erica tetralix and Calluna becoming important. Such transitions are well described in the various phases of Rose ’s (1953) Sphagnum Hummock Complex and were included in the ‘general bog communities ’ characterised by Newbould (1960) from Cranes- moor in the New Forest. It has sometimes been assumed that such zonations as these are a spatial expression of a cyclic alternation of hollows and hummocks in regenerative bog growth (e.g. Tansley 1939) but, as noted above, thé evidence for this is limited. The Sphagnum auriculatum community may thus often be a fairly permanent self-maintaining feature of mire surfaces with rather limited switches from more to less aquatic Sphagna but no guaranteed progression to the vegetation of drier flats and hummocks. Where mire drainage lowers the water-table, the community is readily damaged or destroyed and it has been widely lost where Erico-Sphagnion communities have been converted to Ericion heaths or their degraded derivatives. Shallow peat-digging can create flooded hollows which become suitable for recolonisation by Sphagna, Rhynchospora alba and Drosera ssp. but such locally reconstituted stands often lie in much modified mire contexts (Rose 1953).Distribution "