"m10","Zonation and succession The Pinguiculo-Caricetum marks out areas of soligenous influence of base-rich and calcareous waters, often in association with spring and rill vegetation, within grasslands and more occasionally in ombrogenous mires and around topogenous mires. Stands are usually small and their definition in zonations depends on the strength of flushing and the degree of base-enrichment. Most stands Figure 14. Base-rich flushes among pasture at high (a) and moderate (b) altitudes in northern Britain. MlOb Pinguiculo-Caricetum mire, Briza-Primula sub-community Mila Carici-Saxifragetum mire, Thalictrum-Juncus sub-community M12 Caricetum saxatilis mire M37 Cratoneuron-Festuca spring CG 10a Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, Trifolium-Luzula sub-community CGlOb Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, Carex sub-community CG 11 a Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath, Typical sub-community CGI lb Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath, Carex sub-community CG 12 Festuca-Alchemilla-Silene dwarf-herb community are affected by herbivores and some would probably progress to Alno-Ulmion scrub or woodland if grazing were withdrawn; at higher altitudes, the vegetation may be a climatic climax, though with an internally dynamic character. The most widespread situation in which the community occurs is within sub-montane pastures where it typically forms a zone below springs and flush-lines, often pear-shaped and elongated downslope below iso lated sites of irrigation, in larger stands of more complex configuration where flushing is extensive. Towards the source of flushing it commonly gives way to Cratoneur- ion spring vegetation, usually the Cratoneuron-Festuca rubra community which can extend as a narrow strip down a central vigorous rill. In Scotland especially but also in the Lake District and more locally in the Pen- nines, Saxifraga aizoides rises to prominence in the continuously splashed zone to the centre of these flushes and there is frequently a clear intervening band of the Carici-Saxifragetum (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birks 1973). Where the waters are somewhat less base-rich, the spring vegetation may be represented by the Crato- neuron-Carex nigra community, particularly towards higher altitudes in Scotland, where this vegetation type subsumes part of McVean & Ratcliffe ’s (1962) Hypno- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressMIO Pinguiculo-Caricetum dioicae mire 105 Caricetum alpinum, or even by some kind of Philonotis flush where the waters are only weakly calcareous (Holdgate 1955a, Pigott 1956a). Where flushing occurs on more level ground, complex mosaics of these communities can be seen around the springs (e.g. Poore 1955a, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Towards the margins of these flushes, the Pinguiculo- Caricetum gives way, with varying degrees of abruptness, to the pasture vegetation on drier ground, often standing out in the smooth swards, by virtue of its uneven and broken surface. In Scotland, where the community is generally represented by the Carex-Juncus sub-community, a very widespread context for the Pinguiculo-Caricetum is the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, the common plagioclimax sward of more base-rich brown earths associated with local calcareous outcrops in the Dalradian and, less so, the Moine Assemblages and the Durness Limestone of the far north-west (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birks 1973, Rat cliffe 1977). In the Lake District, a similar zonation can be seen on more calcareous parts of the Borrowdale Volcanics. In Scotland, too, in situations where the surrounding soils are somewhat less base-rich, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum can occur within stretches of the Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath. In both of these grassland types, a Carex pulicaris-Carex panicea sub-community often forms a transition zone on the mildly-irrigated surrounds to the flush (Figure 14) but more abrupt zonations can occur and where soligenous base-enrichment is very localised within stretches of more prevailingly pervious and acidic rocks and soils, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum may be very sharply marked off* from calcifugous Festuca-Agrostis grassland. Comparable zonations to the above can be found in the northern Pennines, though here the Briza-Primula sub-community is the usual kind of Pinguiculo-Caricetum and the pasture is generally the Sesleria-Galium grassland. With the more uniformly calcareous con dition of the soils over the Carboniferous Limestones, there is often a very strong floristic continuity between the different vegetation types, the axis of variation being largely controlled by the amount of soil moisture. A common sequence is from the Typical sub-community of the grassland, through (again) a Carex pulicaris- Carex panicea sub-community and then to the Molinia- Eriophorum variant of the mire, species such as Sesleria, Festuca ovina, Carex flacca, Briza media and Linum catharticum running throughout with virtually undiminished frequency. In Upper Teesdale, the presence of species such as Kobresia, Carex capillaris, Plantago maritima and Racomitrium uliginosum enriches both the pasture (often represented by its Carex-Kobresia sub community) and the drier parts of the mire (in the Thymus-Racomitrium variant) in this kind of zonation and the Gymnostomum sub-community appears on the open gravels (Pigott 1956a, Ratcliffe 1965, Jones 1973, Bradshaw & Jones 1976). Sadly, some of the most intricate of these patterns were lost beneath the Cow Green reservoir. More locally in northern England and north Wales, the Briza-Primula sub-community can pick out flushes within the Festuca-Avenula grassland or, in Durham, the Sesleria-Scabio sa grassland. Less common than these kinds of situation, though often very striking because of the close juxtaposition of rather different vegetation types, are those occurrences of the Pinguiculo-Caricetum around places of soligenous base-enrichment within ombrogenous mires. Fragments of perched blanket mire can sometimes be found where springs are biting back on to gentle peat-clad slopes above (as in upper Teesdale: Pigott 1956a) but, in Scotland, the Carex-Juncus sub-community can occur in prevailing ombrogenous systems, particularly at lower altitudes in the west, where it gives way directly to the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire or sometimes to an intervening zone of the Carex panicea sub-community of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath, into which C. panicea, C. pulicaris, C. echinata, C. demissa, Pinguicula vulgaris, Selaginella selaginoides and locally dominant Schoenus nigricans extend their cover (Poore 1955a, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). In this kind of setting, and where the Pinguiculo-Caricetum occurs more locally in stretches of heath on thin, dry peats, the community typically stands out as fresh green patches. Although the flushes with which this kind of mire is associated are often isolated (though repeated) on slopes, they sometimes feed topogenous fens in basins or channels and then the Pinguiculo-Caricetum can form a fringing zone around the central area, passing to com munities like the Carex-Calliergon mire or, more exclusively at higher altitudes, the Carex-Sphagnum warnstorfii mire on the deeper peat of the more stagnant waters. Such transitions are well seen in small hollows in the central Highlands (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962), where the Carex-Juncus sub-community forms the margins, and at Sunbiggin Tarn (Holdgate 1955a) and Malham Tarn (Sinker 1960, Proctor 1974), where the Briza- Primula sub-community occurs. Almost throughout its range, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum is strongly affected by grazing animals. Without such influence, many stands would probably be open to invasion by shrubs and trees though nutrient deficiency in the soils might be an important hindrance to some species. Likely colonisers are Betula pubescens, Salix cinerea and, in these northern localities, S. pentandr a, S. phylicifolia, S. nigricans and Prunus padus with Fraxinus excelsior figuring on drier margins; Alnus glutinosa is more problematic because of the difficulty of fruit transport. Such mixtures are most characteristic of our Alno-Ulmion woodlands like the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland and wetter stands of the Fraxinus- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press106 Mires Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland, beneath the canopies of which there is often a good representation of the kinds of tall herbs that figure in the Cirsium palustre variant here. In some localities, as in Teesdale and Weardale in Durham and in Swaledale in North Yorkshire, small patches of Pinguiculo-Caricetum persist in the wetter parts of traditionally-treated hay-meadows, whose vegetation has probably been secondarily derived from these kinds of forest (Pigott 1956a). Distribution "