"m11","Zonation and succession The Carici-Saxifragetum is found around springs and flushes, often in association with other calcicolous soli- genous mire vegetation, among sub-montane and high- altitude grasslands and dwarf herb communities and, more occasionally, within ombrogenous bogs. Typically, the stands are small and the definition of the vegetation sequences depends on the strength of irrigation and the amount of base-enrichment of the flush and its surrounds. Grazing may help maintain the open structure of the community and prevent the development of a woody cover, though colonisation by shrubs and trees on the wet and cold soils characteristic here would probably be slow and, at higher altitudes, this kind of mire is probably a climatic climax. Where the Carici-Saxifragetum marks out flushes within stretches of upland pasture, the general pattern of vegetation is the same throughout its range, running, in its fullest development, from Cratoneurion communities around spring-heads, flush-lines and their asso ciated rills, through the Carici-Saxifragetum, then through small-sedge soligenous mire on the less strongly-irrigated surrounds, to the swards of the drier soils beyond. Where vigorous flushes emerge locally on steeper slopes, this kind of pattern can be very well defined, with concentric zones of the different communities elongated downhill; where irrigation is more diffuse and more extensively spread, the zonation may be much less clear, often expressed as a complex mosaic, with the elements associated with stronger water-flow less well developed. At low altitudes, generally below 500 m, where the Carici-Saxifragetum is typically represented by the Cra- toneuron-Eleocharis sub-community, it is often sur rounded by the Pinguiculo-Caricetum, usually some variant of the Carex-Juncus sub-community or, in the north Pennines where the Carici-Saxifragetum occurs very locally, some variant of the Briza-Primula sub community. In such situations, the two kinds of mire can come very close floristically, particularly in those localities beyond the southern limit of Saxifraga aizoides, and the transition between the two is consequently very diffuse. Locally, too, an abundance throughout of Schoenus nigricans (or, in a few localities in Perthshire, S.ferrugineus'. Wheeler et al. 1983) can give an overlying impression of structural uniformity.Beyond this zone of more strongly-flushed, often unstable and sometimes heavily stock-poached soils, there is commonly a gradation to some type of calcicolous grassland, with a closing up of the turf, over drier profiles. Most often, this is the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland: Saxifraga aizoides and some other hydrophilous herbs can run some way into this pasture in its Saxifraga-Ditrichum sub-community (the Saxifrageto- Agrosto-Festucetum of McVean & Ratcliffe 1962) which can form a transitional zone to the unflushed sward. At somewhat higher altitudes, and perhaps on somewhat less base-rich soils, the Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath can provide the context, with its Carex pulicaris-C. panicea sub-community immediately around the flushed areas. In the east-central Highlands, Betula pubescens and Juniperus communis ssp. communis are ready invaders of the less strongly-waterlogged soils of such sequences and the Carici-Saxifragetum forms an important part of the ground mosaic beneath open stands of birch and juniper at sites like Morrone (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe 1977, Huntley & Birks 1979a). At higher altitudes throughout its range, the Carici- Saxifragetum is represented in such zonations by the Thalictrum-Juncus sub-community and, particularly in Breadalbane and more locally to the north-west of Scotland, there is a shift in all the components of the sequence to present a more strikingly montane character. Thus, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum in the surrounding zone is replaced by the Caricetum saxatilis and it is open stony areas in both this community and the Carici- Saxifragetum which provide the major locus for such Arctic-Alpine rarities as Carex atrofusca, C. microglo- chin, Juncus biglumis and J. castaneus and many of the Scottish stations for Kobresia. Then, at these high levels, the Festuca-Alchemilla-Silene dwarf-herb community often forms the surround to the springs on soils which are not so strongly flushed by the springs, though which are kept continually moist by high rainfall and snowmelt and maintained in a similar unstable state by solifluction and cryoturbation. Complexes of these vegetation types, forming a short, diverse and open cover over sparkling mica-schist soils, make a major contribution to the glory of sites like Ben Lawers (e.g. Poore 19556, Raven & Walters 1956, McVean & Rat cliffe 1962). The Cratoneurion communities represented in such sequences are typically low swards like the Cratoneuron- Festuca vegetation, in which S. aizoides often continues to be very prominent, or the less calcicolous Crato- neuron-Carex nigra community. However, where flush waters trickle down very steep rocky faces with ledges, the Saxifraga-Alchemilla tail-herb community can occur in close juxtaposition with the Carici-Saxifragetum. The two vegetation types are floristically quite https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.015 Published online by Cambridge University PressMil Carici-Saxifragetum aizoidis mire 119 similar and the Polygonum variant of the latter community, which Huntley (1979) described from the Clova-Caenlochan area, is floristically intermediate. Salix reticulata finds an occasional place in this kind of Carici-Saxifragetum and it is possible that these vegetation types represent a grazing-mediated succession on more inaccessible dripping crags that would culminate in the development of the Salix-Luzula Arctic-Alpine willow scrub. Even under favourable environmental conditions, however, this sere is, at most, only locally active because of the now very wide dispersal of potential parent bushes. In zonations of the above types, the continuity of floristic variation, with a gradual lessening of the influence of irrigation and base-enrichment in moving away from the springs, is often very obvious. Where the Carici-Saxifragetum marks out flushed sites within ombrogenous mires and related wet-heaths, the soligenous areas are usually much more sharply delineated from their surrounds. The context of flushing can be the Calluna-Eriophorum blanket mire or, at lower altitudes towards the west, the Scirpus-Eriophorum blanket mire or degraded forms of this bog placed in the Scirpus- Erica wet-heath. The Carici-Saxifragetum can again be surrounded by a zone of the Caricetum saxatilis or, at lower levels, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum, but there is typically a very sharp switch from these mires on sloppy mineral soil in the soligenous tracks to the ombrogenous vegetation on the peat around, often with a low, steep bank between. Poore (19556) and McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) both illustrated some very distinctive mosaics of this kind, with isolated hummocks of ombrogenous mire occurring detached from the surrounding bog within the soligenous zone. The latter authors noted how the flushes could isolate such fragments from the effects of burning of the main bog surface, sheltering a refuge for such species as Sphagnum imbricatum and Dicranum bergeri.Distribution "