"m13","Zonation and succession The Schoenetum occurs in zonations around springs and seepage lines where natural variation in the vegetation is related primarily to the height of the water-table in sequences of mineral and organic soils, the character and disposition of which are determined by geology and the pattern of flushing. But such zonations have been widely affected by a variety of treatments such as grazing, mowing and peat-cutting, so that some of their components are plagioclimax vegetation, now often further altered by successional changes attendant upon neglect. Other changes have been induced by drainage and eutrophication and widespread improvement of surrounding land has also left many stands isolated and much modified within intensive agricultural landscapes. In more intact zonations developed over entirely calcareous substrates, the Schoenetum typically grades, on the gleyed mineral soils above seepage lines or around more localised springs, to richer kinds of Junco- Molinion vegetation like the Cirsio-Molinie tum, in which both Schoenus and J. subnodulosus can persist but where dominance generally passes to Molinia. This, in turn, may grade to some kind of Mesobromion grass land on the dry, lithomorphic calcareous soils beyond: usually, within the range of the Schoenetum, this is the Festuca-Avenula grassland. Where flushing occurs more abruptly over limestone slopes, the Schoenetum can give way directly to such a calcicolous sward (Figure 15). In the other direction, where the Schoenetum occurs above and sometimes extends on to deeper peats which have accumulated in valleys and basins under the close influence of calcareous and oligotrophic ground waters, the community can pass directly to some kind of Phrag- mitetalia vegetation, often the Cladietum marisci, on the waterlogged organic soils. Sometimes, in such sequences, the Schoenetum can itself be zoned, the Festuca-Juncus sub-community occupying the drier ground, the Briza-Pinguicula the moister soils and the Caltha-Galium the wettest, and the last type can also be found in hollows on peat with the Carex-Calliergon mire among a matrix of the Cladietum. Such patterns as these are especially characteristic of the Anglesey mires such as Cors Bodeilio, Cors y Farl, Cors Goch and, to a lesser extent, Cors Erddreiniog (Wheeler 1975, Ratcliffe & Hattey 1982 Site group IX). In less consistently oligotrophic situations, the Schoenetum occurs in generally similar zonations, but in association with other communities. Where it occurs around valley mires, for example, in which the peats experience some deposition of allochthonous mineral material, it can give way below to the Phragmitetum australis swamp or some kind of Phragmitetalia tail herb fen, generally the Phragmites-Eupatorium com munity. This is well seen in some of the East Anglian fens like Smallburgh, Seaming, Redgrave/South Lopham and Thelnetham/Blo ’ Norton (Bellamy & Rose 1961, Haslam 1965, Wheeler 1975,1978, Ratcliffe 1977). And, where the gleyed soils around the flushes are somewhat richer than those typically supporting the Cirsio-Moli- nietum, the Schoenetum can grade above to the Juncus- Cirsium community or the Holco-Juncetum and thence, on the drier mineral profiles, to some kind of Cynosur- ion sward. Where irrigation with calcareous waters is a very local phenomenon within tracts of acidic substrates and soils, the community can be found among more calcifugous vegetation. On some of the Norfolk heaths, like Buxton Heath for example, where calcareous drift occupies the bottoms of some hollows and valleys the Schoenetum passes, above the seepage lines, to the Ericetum tetralicis on base-poor gleys. Other Schoenus vegetation in these ‘mixed mires ’ is, however, perhaps better placed in the Schoenus-Narthecium community. Traditional treatments have variously influenced zonations such as these. The middle and drier parts of the sequences were often subject to grazing by stock, the middle and wetter parts to mowing for hay, litter or marsh crops like sedge and reed. Such treatments had the general effect of holding back succession to woodhttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press134 Mires land throughout, but they have probably also influenced the balance of the different components, increasing the extent of one community against another according to the particular regimes of grazing and mowing adopted, treatments which affect the vegetation directly but also modify the nutrient budget of the system. As far as the Schoenetum itself is concerned, the former effects have probably modified transitions to tail-herb fens and swamps by influencing the amounts of Phragmites and Cladium in the vegetation (e.g. Godwin 1941, Haslam 1965), and altered the balance within the community between the Schoenus, J. subnodulosus and Molinia. And alterations in nutrient budget perhaps play a part in the Figure 15. Schoenus communities among fen (a) and bog (b) sequences. Ml3b Schoenetum mire, Briza-Pinguicula sub-community Ml3c Schoenetum mire, Caltha-Galium sub-community M14 Schoenus-Narthecium mire Ml6a Ericetum tetralicis wet heath, Typical sub-community Ml6b Ericetum tetralicis wet heath, Succisa-Carex sub-community balance between the Schoenetum and the Cirsio-Moli- nietum and Juncus-Cirsium community (Wheeler 1983). Treatment regimes have been very variable so actual zonations can be similarly diverse, added to which we now often see their influence blurred by the effects of long neglect, particularly over the surface of peats where mowing for marsh crops has fallen into virtually total disuse. A common pattern now is for the Schoenetum to form the wettest component in a fairly open herbaceous sequence, still maintained by grazing, and to give way below to very dense sedge- or reed-beds or to woodland that has colonised tail-herb fen and swamp. Such transitions have become more frequent with the M21 Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bog M24a Cirsio-Molinietum fen-meadow, Eupatorium sub-community M24b Cirsio-Molinietum fen-meadow, Typical sub-community M24c Cirsio-Molinietum fen-meadow, Juncus-Erica sub-community CG2 Festuca-Avenula grassland S2 Cladietum swamp S25 Phragmites-Eupatorium fen H4 Ulex minor-Agrostis heath https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressM13 Schoenetum nigricantis mire 135 extensive drainage of impeded soils in the British low lands, either locally or as a result of major works which have lowered the water-table in whole catchments (as on the Little Ouse where the Thelnetham and Bio ’ Norton fens have been affected: Ratcliffe 1977). Such treatment tends to speed colonisation of any unreclaimed mire fragments by woody vegetation and has probably des troyed many stands of Schoenetum itself. Even where the community persists, it is often in the form of the impoverished Festuca-Juncus sub-community or transitions to rank Junco-Molinion vegetation. On its other boundary, where it grades on to drier soils, the community has suffered by assiduous agricultural improvement right up to spring and flush lines such that natural zonations are often truncated above, any remaining Schoenetum closely hemmed in by arable land or modified pasture. Eutrophication by fertiliser run-off or drift is a common danger to the community in such situations and, with enrichment of peats by drainage and surface oxidation, the vegetation is open to conversion to Fili- pendulion tail-herb communities, with the Phragmites- Urtica fen on any fragments of wetter soils. With such complex modifications of the habitat of the Schoenetum, it is difficult to tell what the natural serai development of the community might be. Scattered saplings of Ainus glutinosa, Betula pubescens and Salix cinerea can sometimes be found in ungrazed stands (Wheeler 1975) and it is possible that mixed canopies of such species could come to dominate in some kind of Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland over topogenous peats (Wheeler 1980c). Local development of ombrotro- phic nuclei in such situations, or the formation of raised areas within soligenous mires, probably favours a spread of Molinia and preferential invasion by B. pubescens with the eventual formation of some type of Betula- Molinia woodland. Schoenus itself, of course, may play an important role in providing initial sites for the development of acidophilous elements in the flora but, although it can persist for a considerable time under shading branches, it quickly succumbs to the formation of a closed canopy. Distribution "