"m14","Zonation and succession The Schoenus-Narthecium mire is typically found in zonations and mosaics with valley bog and heath com munities whose distribution reflects edaphic and hydro- logical variation. Some stands would probably progress to woodland in the absence of burning or grazing. Where the community occurs in valley mires, it typi cally occupies the zones of moderate soligenous enrichment with bases and calcium, passing laterally to the Narthecio-Sphagnetum on more impoverished and acid peats with a more stagnant water-table, the transition being marked by the disappearance of Schoenus and the extension of the carpet of peat-building Sphagna. Molinia and E. tetralix continue to be well represented on the more raised areas and Rhynchospora alba becomes common, particularly around wetter hollows, where Sphagnum auriculatum pools can be found. Base-poor soligenous tracts in such sequences can have Littorelle- tea vegetation like the Hyperico-Potametum. Characteristically, the Narthecio-Sphagnetum gives way around valley mires to the Ericetum tetralicis and, in some places, this community can be found in direct contact with the Schoenus-Narthecium mire, grading to it through the Succisa-Carex sub-community. Such vegetation may also form a surround to the community where it occurs as slope flushes within tracts of heath, but often it grades in such situations to some kind of Junco-Molinion grassland, in which Molinia is an over whelming dominant and where Schoenus can be sporadically represented, a pattern well seen on the Ayles- beare Common heaths in Devon, described by Ivimey- Cook et al. (X975). Throughout such sequences as these, variations in base-richness and the amount of calcium are probably often quite small (Newbould 1960). In contrast to related vegetation on north-western blanket bogs, the Schoenus-Narthecium mire is probably not a climax community. Succession has never been followed but might be expected to involve invasion by Salix cinerea, Betula pubescens and perhaps Alnus gluti- nosa and the eventual development of some sort of wet woodland. Distribution "