"m15","Zonation and succession Zonations within stands of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath and between the community and other vegetation types generally reflect variations in the soil moisture regime, sometimes with attendant differences in base- and nutrient-status. Such patterns are often overlain by the effects of treatments and, in some cases, the community may represent a serai intermediate between blanket mire and either dry heath or grassland. Without burning or grazing, less-damaged stands might be able to revert to blanket mire or progress to woodland. Much vegetation of this kind has been replaced by coniferous forest after draining of the ground. The intermediate character of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath frequently finds spatial expression in its occurrence as a zone between Sphagnetalia bogs and Calluno- Ulicetalia heaths, the particular nature of the vegetation types and their proportions in the zonations varying with geographical locality, altitude and the character of the terrain. Most often, at lower altitudes in western Britain, where the community is best developed, it occurs in close association with the Scirpus-Eriophorum blanket mire, grading to it in hollows and over gently- undulating ground where there is accumulation of deeper peat with a high and stagnant water-table. More Sphagnum-rich stands of the Typical sub-community may form a more or less gradual transition to the blanket mire, being replaced, on more free-draining slopes, first by less Sphagnum-rich stands of this sub community, then by the Cladonia sub-community over thinner, drier peats. This, in turn, can give way to dry heath on sharply-draining podzols, generally some form of Calluna-Erica cinerea or Calluna-Vaccinium heath, though often dominated overwhelmingly by Calluna, a physiognomic feature which can extend a considerable way into the wet heath, where there has been more controlled burning, and which can therefore blur the upper part of the vegetation sequence. In areas with lower rainfall, the whole zonation tends to move downslope, the Sphagnum-rich Typical sub community, rather than the Scirpus-Eriophorum blanket mire, occupying the wettest ground in hollows and the Cladonia sub-community extending less far up the surrounding slopes before being replaced by drier heath. A similar effect on the upper part of the zonation can be seen where the communities occur over south-facing slopes where the drier heath component can be especially extensive; on northerly aspects, on the other hand, the Scirpus-Erica wet heath transgresses far on to steeper ground (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Increased water movement through the peats is often marked by a rise in the proportion of Molinia through stands of the Typical sub-community and, where soligenous influence is most pronounced, with enhanced aeration and sometimes an increase in base-status and perhaps nutrient content, stretches of the Carex sub community may clothe gentler slopes or occur within definite soakways, running through both the Scirpus- Erica wet heath and the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire and quite often along streams that drain from the peat through surrounding heaths and grasslands. Very fre quently, such zones of water movement are marked most obviously by the presence of Myrica, a feature readily discerned from a distance on the ground or from aerial photographs. Where the Scirpus-Erica wet heath extends to higher altitudes, as it does in Scotland and more locally in northern England and Wales, it can also be found in association with the Calluna-Eriophorum blanket mire, typically forming a zone below it where the peat thins out on steeper or convex slopes. In the north-west Highlands, the community often forms an altitudinal band separating the two kinds of blanket mire and grading in each direction to them. Further east in Scotland, where the Scirpus-Eriophorum bog becomes increasingly rare, the Scirpus-Erica wet heath can occur below the Calluna-Eriophorum mire in transitions to drier heath or grassland (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birks 1973, Birse 1980). Generally, however, in this part of Britain, the community is replaced in such sequences by the Ericetum tetralicis. Fragments of these kinds of zonations are of widespread occurrence where the climate or the terrain is unsuitable for the development of the full sequence and each of the sub-communities can be found alone in vegetation patterns. The Typical and Cladonia sub https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press150 Mires communities, for example, often mark out the most ill- drained patches of ground in gently-undulating land scapes clothed with grasslands and heaths over podzols with varying degrees of drainage impedence and shallow peat accumulation. And the Carex sub-community is of widespread occurrence along fairly base-poor soakways in tracts of heaths and grasslands, well away from stands of other kinds of Scirpus-Erica wet heath or blanket mire (Edgell 1969). In such situations, it may pass, along the water-tracks, to different types of soligenous mire according to the degree of base-and nutrient-enrichment of the incoming waters. Even where extensive zonations occur, however, they have been very widely affected by treatments. Less severe burning and/or grazing can impose a uniformity of dominance over much of the sequence, masking the transition from one vegetation type to another. More drastic or long-continued treatments, particularly where these accentuate the effects of natural degeneration of peatlands, have a more profound influence on the floristics. It is likely that some stands of the Scirpus- Erica wet heath have been derived from blanket mire as a result of a combination of climatic change, burning and grazing. Sphagnetalia communities affected by these factors tend to lose their luxuriant carpet of Sphagna and to show an increase in either Racomitrium lanuginosum and lichens or Nardetalia herbs and hyp- noid mosses (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962), trends which can be seen, for example, in the Cladonia and Juncus- Rhytidiadelphus sub-communities of the Scirpus-Erio- phorum blanket mire. Elimination of Eriophorum vagi- natum from these vegetation types can produce assemblages which are indistinguishable from the Cladonia and Vaccinium sub-communities of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath and extensive mosaics of these vegetation types can be seen on many areas of degenerating ombro- genous peat. Deep sheet-erosion may lead to a replacement of the Carex sub-community in such patterns by the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire in widespread systems of runnels (Birks 1973), and where the wasting peat is washed down over the slopes below, there can be transitions to Nardetalia grasslands with much N ar dus and Juncus squarrosus. Although in the far west, blanket mire seems to be able to regenerate in less-disturbed areas of wet ground (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962), it seems unlikely that pro gression to the Scirpus-Erica wet heath or beyond can be readily reversed. Cessation of burning, especially on peat that is naturally well-aerated or where there has been draining, may precipitate a vigorous expansion of Molinia and, in some areas, blanket mires and wet heath seem to have converged into vast tracts of Molinia- dominated grasslands in which Sphagnetalia or Sphagno-Ericetalia species play a relatively minor role, mosaics among them being shaded out or at least masked by the dominant. Invasion of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath by woody species is probably theoretically possible over most, if not all, its altitudinal range but widespread deforestation has often removed potential seed-parents, and continued grazing by stock and deer and sporadic burning may be enough to set back succession continually. Betula pubescens and Pinus sylvestris are the most likely invaders of the characteristic soils here, especially on the drier ground of the Cladonia and Vaccinium sub-communities, but seedlings are rarely found. Coniferous plantations, on the other hand, have been established over extensive stretches of drained ombrogenous peat, some of which probably carried the Scirpus-Erica wet heath. Distribution "