"m16","Zonation and succession The Ericetum tetralicis occurs as part of zonations related to the height of the water-table in sequences of acid and oligotrophic soils. Locally, these can be complicated by increased soligenous influence on slopes or by variations in the base-richness and trophic state of soil parent materials or waters. Burning can superimpose differences in floristics and structure and frequent firing and/or draining degrades the community. In the absence of grazing and burning, the Ericetum progresses to woodland. When fully developed around lowland valley mires, the pattern of communities in which the Ericetum occurs is very striking (e.g. Rose 1953, Wheeler 1983). Downslope, on the deep, wet peats of the bog itself, it gives way to the Narthecio-Sphagnetum with the Sphagnum auriculatum bog-pool community in deeper hollows, many of the species of the Ericetum running on into the lawn and hummock component of the mire surface, but Sphagnum compactum and, to a lesser extent, S. tenellum, being replaced by S. papillosum and S. magellanicum. Beyond this, towards the main axis of the mire, there is often a zone of Littorelletea vegetation or Caricion nigrae poor fen and then a central strip of Salix-Galium woodland. https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press164 Mires In mires with a little more enrichment, the last community may be replaced by the Alnus-Carex woodland from which patchy Caricetumpaniculatae swamp may run out a little way. Upslope from the Ericetum, with the passage to drier acidic soils, there is a transition to Calluno- Ulicetalia heath, though the particular community involved varies according to the region in which the site occurs. In the more continental climate of East Anglia, a sharp switch to the Calluna-Festuca dry heath is characteristic but, with the shift into the more oceanic southwest, so-called ‘humid heaths ’ are interposed in the sequence, first the Ulex minor-Agrostis curtisii heath in sites around the Hampshire basin, and then from there westwards the Ulex gallii-Agrostis heath. Increasingly, in such zonations, both E. tetralix and Molinia, as well as Calluna, maintain their representation through these intermediate vegetation types, so it is generally the downslope limit of E. cinerea, the Ulex spp. and A. curtisii that marks the transition to the Ericion wet heath. Above these zonations, pockets of deeper, well- drained soil can have stands of the Pteridium-Galium community or, where there has been some enrichment of the ground, the Rubus-Pteridium underscrub or Ulex- Rubus scrub, the latter especially characteristic of dis turbed places, as along trackways. Complete zonations of this kind can still be seen in and around the series of New Forest valley mires, such as the Denny/Shatterford system and Wilverley, Holms- ley and Matley bogs (Rose 1953, Tubbs 1968, Ratcliffe 1977, NCC New Forest Bogs Report 1984) and on some of the south Dorset heaths, like Morden, though there the Ericetum is reduced to a narrow zone around a rather flat-bottomed valley (Ratcliffe 1977). Elsewhere, the sequence of communities is incomplete below. At Thursley Common in Surrey, for example, the Narthe- cio-Sphagnetum terminates the zonation below (Rose 1953, Ratcliffe 1977) and, quite often, it is the Ericetum itself which occupies the wettest ground, clothing the bottom of shallow valleys and hollows. This is the case on some of the remaining Sussex commons like Ash down Forest, over the northern New Forest terraces (Fisher 1975«, b) and on many of the fragments of south Dorset heathland, where there are the additional features of the presence of Erica ciliaris in a number of the communities and the close juxtaposition with openwater and maritime vegetation (Chapman 1975, Rat cliffe 1977). In other sites, the basic sequence of communities is complicated by the interpolation of other vegetation types related to base-or nutrient-richness in the sub strates or waters. In some of the New Forest mires, like Cranesmoor for example (Newbould 1960), on Hartland Moor in Dorset (Ratcliffe 1977) and at Aylesbeare Common in Devon (Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975), the Schoenus-Narthecium community figures prominently along the axes of soligenous water movement and, in the last site, there are also extensive stands of Junco- Molinion vegetation, continuing the floristic trend seen within the Ericetum itself in the Succisa-Carex sub community. Then, in some of the ‘mixed mires ’ developed on north Norfolk commons like Roydon, there can be a much more striking switch to a more calcicolous series of vegetation types, including the Cirsio-Molinietum, the Schoenetum, tail-herb Phragmitetalia fen and carr (Rose 1953, Daniels & Pearson 1974, Wheeler 1975). Further north in Britain, these kinds of valley mire zonations become rare and the Ericetum often occurs in what is essentially a reverse sequence of communities, giving way above to ombrogenous mire on deeper, wetter blanket peat, generally within the range of the Ericetum, the Calluna-Eriophorum mire; and passing below to a variety of northern dry heaths, throughout which burning has often resulted in a fairly uniform predominance of Calluna, or which have run down to Nardo-Galion grasslands with much Juncus squarrosus and Nardus stricta. Where relaxation of burning and grazing allows invasion of shrubs and trees, the Ericetum is probably rapidly converted to woodland. Although this process has not been followed in detail, the most natural successor to the community is likely to be the Betula-Molinia woodland, Betula pubescens and Salix cinerea leading the colonisation and Pinus sylvestris sometimes making a prominent local contribution where it can readily seed in from nearby plantations. Molinia continues to play a major role in the field layer of this woodland, though the ericoids persist only patchily in areas with a more open canopy. Draining can probably speed up this succession, though it may allow a phase of strong Molinia- dominance to supervene between the heath and the woodland. In time, the Betula-Molinia woodland may give way to the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland. Combinations of frequent burning, draining and damage due to other operations like military manoeuvres and mineral extraction have led to an irretrievable loss of the Ericetum in many areas (Rose 1953, Ratcliffe 1977). Even where stands survive intact, the characteristic zonations in which the vegetation occurs have been truncated and the community can now often be found closely hemmed in by coniferous plan tations or intensive agricultural land (e.g. Moore 1962). Distribution "