"m17","Zonation and succession Zonations between the different kinds of Scirpus-Eriophorum mire and to other vegetation types are most often related to the height of the water-table and the degree of soligenous influence within stretches of blanket peat. Effects of treatment can overlie such transitions and they may precipitate a run-down of the vegetation through wet heath to dry heath and grassland. Without disturbance or any natural shift in the extreme oceanic conditions, the community subsists as a climatic climax. Internal vegetational patterning on virgin tracts of oceanic blanket bog is most commonly related to the differentiation of surface microrelief. Then, the Drosera- Sphagnum sub-community occupies the bulk of the wetter ground, with the Cladonia sub-community pick ing out the tops of the drier hummocks, and Rhynchos- porion vegetation occurring in the pools. Typically, within the range of the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, this latter is represented by the Sphagnum auriculatum community: species like Eriophorum angustifolium, Molinia, Narthecium and Drosera rotundifolia may run some way into this vegetation, but there is a pronounced shift in the Sphagnum carpet to dominance of S. auriculatum and S. cuspidatum and stands are commonly marked by a fringe of Rhynchospora alba. It is in this kind of situation that species such as Hammarbya paludosa and Scheuchzeria palustris are recorded within tracts of Scirpus-Eriophorum mire. The clarity of differentiation of these pools, and the proportion of the mire surface occupied by their Rhynchosporion vegetation, vary considerably: they are best developed and most extensive in the zone with more than 200 wet days yr 1, becoming less important in the southern part of the range of the community, as in Wales and on Dartmoor (Lindsay et al. 1984). But, even in the far north-west, their occurrence is quite variable and seems to be related to local accumulation of waters over depressions in the underlying ground or where there is channelling from the mire surrounds. Quite commonly, it is in just such situations that the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire approaches most closely to the Erica-Sphagnum papillosum mire, and is sometimes replaced by it (as in certain of the Silver Flowe mires: Ratcliffe & Walker 1958). The relationships between the two communities in these habitats, which are transitional between blanket and raised bogs, need further investigation. Where there is a thinning of the cover of blanket peat and better drainage, as on steeper ground around valley bottoms or where plateaus give way to fringing hills above or slopes below, the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire is typically replaced throughout its range by the Scirpus- Erica wet heath. Some important vascular species, like Scirpus, Molinia, Calluna and E. tetralix, run on into this vegetation and their dominance throughout may mask other floristic changes, but Eriophorum vaginatum declines greatly in frequency, the Sphagnum carpet loses its variety and luxuriance, and any differentiation of surface relief is lost as the peat cover becomes drier and thinner. Such zonations can be quite abrupt where there is a fairly marked change of slope, but often they are gradual and the Sphagnum sub-community of the Scir pus-Erica wet heath, with its modest frequencies of S. papillosum and E. vaginatum, may then form a tran sitional zone. And the relative proportions of the two communities vary with regional climate and local topographical modification of it: in drier areas or on southfacing slopes, the whole sequence tends to move downslope, the mire becoming more confined to the flattest ground, the wet heath more extensive. Such general zonations are complicated by soligenous influence which tends to cut across the transitions down the lines of steeper slope. Most often, in these oceanic https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press178 Mires blanket mires, areas of more pronounced seepage are marked by the Carex sub-community of the Scirpus- Erica wet heath, which can form quite extensive stands over slopes with some through-put or narrow, sinuous strips along obvious soakways. These can run through both the wet heath and the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire and then out of the bog along the silty margins of streams. They are frequently marked by a local dominance of Molinia and Myrica but more open stands can provide the most usual locus for Schoenus nigricans within British blanket mire. Altitudinal zonations from the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire to the Calluna-Eriophorum mire are not very fre quent because low-and high-level stretches of flatter ground are often separated by intervening slopes: in the north-west Highlands, for example, the two communities are separated by a zone of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath on better-drained blanket peat. But, in some places, generally between 300 and 450 m, the two can grade imperceptibly one into the other and, in eastern Scotland particularly, the Juncus-Rhytidiadelphus sub community represents an intermediate kind of blanket mire. Treatments, among which burning has probably been of special importance, can modify all these kinds of zonations and induce successional changes in the Scir pus-Eriophorum mire. In some cases, where differences of surface-drainage are very marked, burning may actually sharpen up the vegetation boundaries by allowing different species to gain ascendancy on wetter or drier ground: Eriophorum vaginatum, for example, may become locally dominant after fire in the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire but not in the adjoining heath. In other cases, burning may impose a fairly uniform dominance of Scirpus or Molinia throughout the sequence, blurring zonations among the associates, and some tracts of such fire-climax vegetation may have been partly or wholly derived from the community. But, apart from such modifications of dominance, burning has probably played a major part, along with marginal peat-cutting and draining, in the surfacedrying of the peats that precipitates more dramatic changes in the vegetation. The Cladonia sub-community can represent the first stage in such a development which, with the final elimination of E. vaginatum and further impoverishment of the Sphagnum carpet, perhaps moves to the Cladonia sub-community of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath. Erica cinerea is the potential vascular dominant that seems to gain ascendancy on such drying peats in more oceanic regions (e.g. Goode & Lindsay 1979, Hulme & Blyth 1984) and Calluna-Erica heath may represent an end point in such a run-down. At higher altitudes, in areas with a somewhat drier climate, an analogous trend may involve the conversion of the Juncus-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire to the Vaccinium sub community of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath, where Vaccinium myrtillus can become an important sub-shrub, perhaps presaging a switch to Calluna- Vaccinium heath. Certainly, complex mosaics of intermediate stages in such processes, approximating to various kinds of Scir pus-Erica heath, with fragments of Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, are of widespread occurrence on deeper peats that would naturally be expected to be clothed with extensive tracts of the latter. Grazing and improvement may take the process further beyond the dry-heath phase to grasslands of various kinds: on Lewis, for example, the crofting townships are fringed by Junco-Molinion swards and Lolio-Cynosuretum that have been derived from blanket mire by top-sowing and the addition of shell-sand and ratio fertilisers (Hulme & Blyth 1984). It is possible that natural climatic change has played some part in the degeneration of blanket peats occupied by the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire. This kind of ombrogenous bog appears to have been initiated locally at the Boreal/Atlantic transition about 7000 years ago and to have resumed rapid growth following climatic deterioration between 600 bc to 500 ad, often spreading to replace forest, tree stumps of which are frequently preserved beneath the peat. However, despite some subsequent amelioration of the climate, it probably remains a climax vegetation type in more oceanic parts of the country. Distribution "