"m18","Zonation and succession Zonations between the sub-communities of the Erica- Sphagnum mire are related to the height of the watertable and transitions to other vegetation types to the degree of stagnation and to the extent of soligenous influence. Treatments can modify these patterns greatly and permit the replacement of the community by other herbaceous vegetation or by woodland. Internal patterning within virgin stands of the Erica- Sphagnum mire characteristically reflects the differentiation of surface microrelief. As noted above, this is generally less pronounced than in the more oceanic Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, though it shows some variation with climate and also with the size of the bog. Often https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.022 Published online by Cambridge University PressM18 Erica tetralix-Sphagnum papillosum raised and blanket mire 189 the Sphagnum-Andromeda sub-community predominates over extensive wet lawns, with the Empetrum- Cladonia sub-community marking out raised areas, frequently slight and of irregular disposition, in other cases more prominent and ordered, with a clearer zonation among the plants in relation to the height of the water-table. Where pools occur in the hollows, there are transitions from the Sphagnum-Andromeda sub community to Rhynchosporion vegetation, with a shift in the Sphagnum carpet to semi-aquatic species and a reduction in many of the vascular plants characteristic of the mire plane, notably Calluna, Scirpus and E. vaginatum. As on the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, a fringe of Rhynchospora alba often marks this switch, but here the Rhynchosporion vegetation is typically represented by the Sphagnum cuspidatum!recurvum community, the Sphagnum auriculatum type of bog pool generally being confined to sites in areas with a somewhat more oceanic climate, where the mire vegetation itself is of a tran sitional character (as on the Silver Flo we: Ratcliffe & Walker 1958). Usually, S. cuspidatum is the predominant pool species but, where mire surfaces have become eutrophicated, S. recurvum often becomes abundant (see below). Natural zonations from the Erica-Sphagnum mire to other vegetation types are often related to the degree of stagnation in the peats and, on raised bogs, this characteristically lessens towards the margins where there is a more steeply-sloping surround or rand of sometimes considerable width. Over this, the freely-drained conditions exclude the Erica-Sphagnum mire and it is typi cally replaced by vegetation in which Molinia is the leading species, a pattern well seen in the maps and transects of Cors Goch glan Teifi (Godwin & Conway 1939) and some of the Silver Flowe mires (Ratcliffe & Walker 1958, Boatman et al. 1981). The overwhelming dominance of Molinia, and the consequent exclusion of associates from this zone, sometimes make it difficult to determine the exact character of this vegetation but it can usually be referred to the Junco-Molinion. Gradations between this and the Erica-Sphagnum mire of the bog dome are rarely abrupt and transitional vegetation can sometimes be clearly identified as Scirpus-Erica wet heath, often the Sphagnum sub-community which has some representation of Sphagnetalia species (as in the ‘intermediate bog ’ of Ratcliffe & Walker 1958). Else where, such gradual transitions can be incorporated within the Erica-Sphagnum mire itself, the change being essentially confined to gentle shifts of dominance as the rand is approached (Figure 16). Rands are sometimes dissected by erosion channels in which there is some clear soligenous influence but, in normal circumstances, these do not eat back on to the bog dome itself and direct transitions from the Erica- Sphagnum mire to soligenous mires are rare on raised bogs. Nonetheless, the distinctive vegetation of the lagg zone beyond the rand is an integral part of the large- scale pattern in this kind of habitat and it is typically some kind of Caricion nigrae poor fen, often the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire, with some invasion by woody Figure 16. Changes in raised mire zonations from more natural sequence of communities (foreground) to that on drying bog surfaces (background). M1 Sphagnum auriculatum bog pool community M6 Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire Ml5b Scirpus-Erica wet heath, Typical sub-communityM18a Erica-Sphagnum bog, Sphagnum-Andromeda sub-community Ml8b Erica-Sphagnum bog, Empetrum-Cladonia sub-community M25a Molinia-Potentilla mire, Erica sub-community W4 Betula-Molinia woodland https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press190 Mires plants producing Salix-Galium or Betula-Molinia woodland or, where there is some greater degree of base enrichment, the Alnus-Carex woodland. This type of pattern can be seen at Cors Fochno, Rhos Goch and Glasson Moss. Where the Erica-Sphagnum mire is represented on basin mires, the community can be found in closer juxtaposition with both soligenous and topogenous vegetation which, with some base-and/or nutrientenrichment from the incoming waters, often shows a slight shift towards a more calcicolous or eutrophic character. At Llyn in Powys, for example, Cors Graia- nog in Gwynedd and Cumwhitton, the Erica-Sphagnum mire occurs with the Potentillo-Caricetum and there are sometimes close associations with the Car ex-Sphagnum warnstorfii or Car ex-Sphagnum squarrosum mires or even with vegetation approaching the Carex-Calliergon mire, again with varying colonisation by Salix spp. and Betula pubescens. Where the Erica-Sphagnum mire occurs in conditions approaching those of blanket bog, the vegetation pat tern may preserve some features of the raised mire system, with a rand on most of the circumference, or just on one side (as on Snibe and Brishie bogs, respectively, in the Silver Flowe complex: Ratcliffe & Walker 1958), passing gradually over its other edges to blanket mire proper or, where there is a transition to steeper valleyside slopes, to Scirpus-Erica wet heath on thinner, drier peats. In other cases, ill-defined patches of the Erica- Sphagnum mire occur embedded within tracts of blanket bog where the peat mantle deepens over cols or sub surface hollows. Usually, at the lower altitudes of which the community is characteristic, it is the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire which provides the context, as in southern Scottish sites like Mochrum Lochs and Kilquhockadale Flow (Ratcliffe 1977, Bignal & Curtis 1981), though towards the Pennines and particularly at higher alti tudes, this is replaced by the Calluna-Eriophorum mire, as around Irthinghead on the Cumbria/Northumber- land border, on Stainmore (Pearsall 1941) and at Moor House (Eddy et al. 1969). At lower levels soligenous soaks can sometimes be found in close association with the Erica-Sphagnum mire, with a cover of the Carex sub community of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath or some type of Carex e chinât a-Sphagnum mire. At higher altitudes, surface erosion features are sometimes found with systems of gullies fretting the surface and the Erio phorum angustifolium community in pools. Such zonations as these have been very widely affected by treatments, particularly at lower altitudes where there has been a long history of local, but sometimes intensive, exploitation of peatlands and where many raised and basin mires now remain, much modified and safeguarded only by statutory protection, within intensive agricultural landscapes. The influences of treat ments have been very diverse, partly because histories of interference have been complex, and partly because different communities in the vegetation patterns are affected in different ways by peat-cutting, burning and draining. But some general effects can be discerned. First, lowering of the water-table, and surface-damage by burning on raised and basin mires, tend to shift the balance within the Erica-Sphagnum mire towards the Empetrum-Cladonia sub-community and sometimes towards more overwhelming dominance by Calluna, E. vaginatum, Scirpus or, increasing beyond its usual low cover here, Molinia. Such changes can occur over entire mire surfaces but they often show first around the margins, where the rand vegetation extends its cover inwards, and at the centre, such that the Erica-Sphagnum mire is reduced to a narrowing ring. Increasing climatic dryness makes raised mires particularly sus ceptible to such modifications (Godwin & Conway 1939). Continuations of such a trend would be expected to convert the Erica-Sphagnum mire to the Scirpus-Erica wet heath with the loss of Eriophorum vaginatum and the luxuriant Sphagnum lawns, but particular sites often show a complex patchwork of vegetation intermediate between the two, with local dominance of ericoids, Scirpus and Molinia, the balance between which is also affected by burning and grazing. Establishment of dry Calluno-Ulicetalia heath may follow but, very com monly, once the surface has ceased to be waterlogged, invasion by woody plants supervenes. Betula pubescens (with B. pendula on drier peats) and Pinus sylvestris are the major colonisers. The former can come to dominate in Betula-Molinia woodland or, where drying out has proceeded further, in birch-dominated stands of the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland. The pine, though usually seeding in from plantation stock, can form a canopy to vegetation very similar to the natural Pinus- Hylocomium woodland in which E. tetralix or Empe- trum can persist under more open covers and where such characteristic species as Pyrola minor or Listera cordata sometimes appear. Pine woodland of this kind can be seen colonising the community at Moorthwaite Moss and Kirkconnell Flow. Second, peat-cutting often contributes to the surface drying of raised and basin mires but it also results in patterns of its own which fret the bog surface with systems of hollows and baulks. Where the hydrological regime has not been too grossly disrupted, such uneven ground may preserve something of the natural pattern of virgin mires, with the two sub-communities disposed according to the wetness of the ground, but with an artificial regularity over the surface. Often, however, the impact has been more drastic, so that complex mosaics of secondarily-developed communities remain, with poor fens,wet and dry heath, bracken stands and Salix https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.022 Published online by Cambridge University PressM18 Erica tetralix-Sphagnum papillosum raised and blanket mire 191 and birch woodland all jumbled together: this is well shown over parts of the Somerset Levels and on Thorne Waste. Eutrophication of the mire surface or of the ground waters around is often an attendant feature of such gross disturbance and even sites which have remained reasonably intact can show marked effects of enrichment from, for example, fertiliser run-off or drift. This is especially prevalent in some of the Cheshire and Shropshire mires, where it has resulted in a spread of Sphagnum recurvum, from its usual confines in pools over extensive wet lawns in which the Sphagnum-Andromeda sub-community of the Erica-Sphagnum mire is reduced to scattered (though sometimes apparently actively-growing) patches on slightly raised areas (Sinker 1962, Green & Pearson 1968, Tallis 1973tz). Stratigraphical studies clearly show that, in raised and basin mires, vegetation of the Erica-Sphagnum type has developed as the climax of a hydroserai succession, the commonest sequence of which has been open water, swamp, fen, woodland and bog, the stages to fen often taking less than 1000 years, the later phases sometimes much longer (e.g. Walker 1970). Although there is evidence in the peats of periods of drier climate since the initiation of ombrogenous accumulation, the community seems to persist on active surfaces at the present time, provided treatments are not too disruptive of the hydro- logical regime. Distribution "