"m19","Zonation and succession The Calluna-Eriophorum mire is characteristically found in zonations and mosaics with wet and dry heaths and grasslands over sequences of increasingly better-drained soils, with soligenous mires often interrupting the pat terns where there is local flushing and sometimes relieving the prevailingly calcifuge nature of the vegetation cover. Almost universally, such transitions have been affected by treatments, which can blur the boundaries between the vegetation types, encourage some succes- sional changes among them and introduce new elements of variation, particularly striking where these factors contribute to gross erosion of the peat. The basic edaphically-related pattern is best seen where there is a gradual thinning of the ombrogenous peat cover to a humic top over gleyed podzols and then a thin layer of mor over freely-draining podzols, where the Calluna-Eriophorum mire gives way first to Ericetalia heath, then to Calluno-Ulicetalia heath and/or Nardetalia grasslands. Typically, such sequences are disposed over ground of progressively increasing slope, running downhill where the blanket bog occupies the summits of hills (a frequent occurrence here), running uphill where it clothes valley bottoms and plateaus which give way above to a fringe of steeper ground. The transitions may be on a grand scale, where more or less flat land is a prevailing element in the scenery, as is the case in parts of the Central Highlands, over the rounded summits of the Cheviot and on the high Pennines, where the communities can show a crude altitudinal pattern of replacement one by the other. But, in more rugged terrain, the zonations are on a finer scale, with repeated sequences over the stepped landscapes of grits and shales, for example, or complex mosaics disposed over craggy ground with small boulders. And, as in similar transitions with the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, regional and local climate can influence the proportions of the com munities that are represented, with the wetter elements of the sequence extended on to somewhat steeper slopes in areas with higher rainfall or on northern aspects, but contracted in drier sites. The particular kinds of Calluna-Eriophorum mire found in these zonations, and the types of heath and grassland, vary with altitude and, where the bog gives way both above and below to such sequences, different heaths and grasslands may be represented in each, though the general physiognomic character of the tran sitions is very similar. The shift to Ericetalia wet heath is thus usually marked by a fairly rapid loss of E. vaginatum and a further reduction in the often already low cover of Sphagna such as S. papillosum in the ground carpet. Where the Calluna-Eriophorum mire extends to lower altitudes in the Erica sub-community, such transitions can be fairly gradual and very like those found around the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, with the Sphagnum sub-community of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath forming a marginal zone. But, at higher altitudes, where the Calluna-Eriophorum mire is represented by other sub-communities, it is usually drier forms of Ericetalia heath that replace the community as the peat cover thins: often, in such situations, the Vaccinium sub community of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath can be found, but at lower altitudes in eastern Scotland, the Juncus- Dicranum sub-community of the Ericetum tetralicis can mark the transition. In these vegetation types, the most obvious floristic changes, apart from the reduction in E. vaginatum and the Sphagna, are increased vigour among the sub-shrubs, an abundance of Juncus squarrosus and/ or Nardus stricta and the frequent occurrence of acro carpous mosses such as Dicranum scoparium and Cam- pylopus paradoxus, with Racomitrium lanuginosum and lichens often prominent on bare peat. Sometimes, this wet-heath zone is of considerable extent but quite frequently, where the margin of the bog is steep, it is reduced in width or totally absent, with an abrupt switch to dry heath, with overwhelming dominance of Calluna, or one of the Empêtra or Vaccinia. Usually, such vegetation can be included within the Calluna-Vaccinium or Vaccinium-Deschampsia heaths, but, at higher altitudes, the Calluna-Cladonia or Cal luna-Ar ctostaphylos heaths can replace the Calluna- Eriophorum mire on steeper, drier slopes, and these in turn may give way to lichen- or moss-dominated vege tation on very exposed summits. At lower altitudes, the zonation often continues beyond the heaths into some kind of Nardetalia grassland and, quite often, there are direct transitions from the community to these vege tation types with the increasing influence of pastoral agriculture (see below). General patterns of the kinds described above are frequently complicated by the local occurrence of soligenous mires, and sometimes small topogenous basins associated with them. Again, the particular character of this vegetation varies with altitude. At lower levels, through the range of the Erica and Empetrum sub communities, various kinds of Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire, dominated by small sedges or Junci, can be found around flushes and along water-tracks through the bog and into the zones of fringing vegetation. At higher altitudes, this community is replaced in analo- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.023 Published online by Cambridge University PressM19 Calluna vulgaris-Eriophorum vaginatum blanket mire 205 gous situations by the Carex-Sphagnum russowii mire. Where the flushing waters are somewhat less base-poor, the Carex-Sphagnum warnstorfii mire occurs, or where there is a marked enrichment, as where the blanket bog has encroached over calcareous substrates, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum, Carici-Saxifragetum or Caricetum sax atilis can mark out sites with soligenous influence, with the Carex-Calliergon mire in small waterlogged hollows. Such variegation often provides the floristically most interesting element of internal patterning on the Cal luna-Eriophorum mire, because true hummock/hollow relief, with its distinctive zoning of plants and transitions to Rhynchosporion pools, is only rarely encountered. It is sometimes developed in the Erica sub-community, which can occur within tracts of the Empetrum type where a higher water-table is locally maintained, and then the Rhynchosporion component is generally represented by the Sphagnum cuspidatum /recurvum community. In other cases, the Carex ro str ata-Sphagnum recurvum or Eriophorum angustifolium communities can mark out pools. Much more commonly, internal variation within tracts of the Calluna-Eriophorum mire comprises quantitative differences in the major structural elements developed in response to burning and grazing. If such treatments are drastic and frequent or long-maintained, they can induce more substantial qualitative changes in the vegetation: in some cases, such changes can be reversed but they may initiate a run-down of the community and contribute to the destruction of the underlying peats. Most obviously, frequent burning and heavy grazing contribute to the conversion of the Calluna-Eriophorum mire into the Eriophorum mire, where ericoids, Sphagna and hypnaceous mosses are of very patchy occurrence and E. vaginatum overwhelmingly dominant. Locally- extensive tracts of this impoverished vegetation can be found through much of the range of the Calluna- Eriophorum mire, though reversion to the richer blanket bog has been demonstrated after only 15 years of enclosure and freedom from burning at Moor House (Rawes 1983). In the southern Pennines, however, where injudicious treatments have been combined with draining and aerial pollution over the past two centuries, the degeneration of the Calluna-Eriophorum mire is particularly widespread and perhaps irremediable. Here, too, erosion of the peats is especially severe, with much bare peat even among the remnants of the richer blanket bog, patchy Eriophorum angustifolium pools occurring where water collects and soligenous vegetation approximating to the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire marking out gullies with some moderate water movement. Similar mosaics are very well seen in the map of Moor House in Eddy et al. (1969). In other cases, treatments can convert the Calluna- Eriophorum mire into heath or grassland. The peats here are already fairly dry, so it is often a small step, with artificial drainage, to encourage a succession to wet heath, a change marked most obviously by a reduction in the vigour of E. vaginatum, and then to dry heath, with its overwhelming dominance of ericoids. Combined with grazing, such treatment can produce a Nar detalia sward or, with liming and fertiliser application, even something approximating to a Cynosurion pas ture. With less assiduous improvement, Juncus squarrosus often gains an opportunity to spread in such situations, though enclosure of a Jwwa/s-dominated pasture at Moor House showed that such a trend could be reversed, the vegetation beginning to develop into Cal luna-Eriophorum mire after 25 years (Rawes 1981). The recent subsidising of improvement of hill-grazings has greatly speeded the reclamation of this kind of blanket bog for agriculture and rendered such changes more permanent. In other places, draining has been a prelude to afforestation. Distribution "