"m2","Zonation and succession The Sphagnum cuspidatumIrecurvum community is typi cally found as the pool, wet hollow or lawn component in the Erica-Sphagnum mire, grading to drier flat and hummock vegetation with increasing height above the water-table. There is some evidence that such patterns may represent cyclical regeneration complexes but such succession may be extremely slow and, on drained mires, the community may remain as a fragment of the pre viously active surface or in artificial pools among run down wet heath and woodland. A typical zonation on an active raised mire runs from the Rhynchospora sub-community through the Sphagnum-Andromeda sub-community of the Erica-Sphagnum mire on the flats to the Empetrum-Cladonia sub community on the hummock sides and tops. In the Sphagnum carpet, there is a switch from S. cuspidatum to S. papillosum, S. tenellum and S. magellanicum and thence to 5. capillifolium. Among the vascular plants, Rhynchospora continues only a little way on to the flats, forming a fringe to the pools, but Drosera rotundifolia and, especially noticeable on these mires, Andromeda maintain their frequency in the transition to the Sphagnum-Andromeda sub-community of the mire. Erio phorum angustifolium and Erica tetralix also remain very common and are joined by Eriophorum vaginatum, Calluna and Scirpus cespitosus and these five species contribute the bulk of the vascular cover on the flats and hummocks. The clarity of the sequence and the relative contributions of the different elements vary considerably according to the degree of structural patterning on the mire surface but the general transition is well seen in the series of noda characterised by Bignal & Curtis (1981) from Strathclyde mires and illustrated diagram- matically in Godwin & Conway ’s (1939) classic study of Cors Goch Gian Teifi. Essentially similar sequences can be found where the community occurs within the Erica-Sphagnum mire on solid and Schwingmoor peats in basins, notably in the Shropshire-Cheshire Plain, though here it is now most often represented by the Sphagnum recurvum sub community which tends to be the dominant element in extensive lawns with rather poor internal structural differentiation. A range of zonations with different degrees of clarity is well described in Tallis ’s (1973a) survey of these sites and the general predominance of S. recurvum throughout such sequences is clearly seen in published profiles of Clarepool Moss (Sinker 1962) and Wybunbury Moss (Green & Pearson 1968). At least some of the hummock/hollow complexes in which this community is found, on active mire surfaces developed under undisturbed conditions, may represent regeneration complexes of the kind described by Osvald (1923; see also Godwin & Conway 1939, Tansley 1939), though stratigraphical evidence suggests that the cyclical pattern of replacement is probably very slow, pro ceeding over centuries. In such situations, the Rhynchospora sub-community is probably the more natural kind of Sphagnum cuspidatum!recurvum bog pool with the Sphagnum recurvum sub-community playing a minor role and particularly associated with areas of soligenous influence. With increased disturbance and modest eutrophication of mire surfaces, however, the latter sub community has become more frequent, not only in scattered flooded peat workings, but also more extensively where mires have been subject to increased input of enriched waters from surrounding land. In the basin mires of Shropshire and Cheshire, this seems to have been a fairly recent process attendant upon agricultural improvement of the surrounding land and, in some cases, the decay of old drainage systems on the mires (Sinker 1962, Green & Pearson 1968, 1977, Tallis https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press54 Mires 1973a). At some sites, renewed growth of the Sphagnum carpet under such conditions has caused a reversion from the heath and woodland of the once-drained surfaces. Where drainage has proceeded without this kind of interruption, the Sphagnum cuspidatum!recurvum bog pools have been progressively reduced with conversion of the mire surface to Ericion tetralicis wet heath. Fragments may remain within tracts of the Scirpus- Erica or Ericetum tetralicis wet heaths, generally dominated by mixtures of Molinia, Scirpus or ericoids (e.g. Sinker 1962, Tallis 1973#) or among developing woodland, usually birch-or pine-dominated stands of the Betula-Molinia woodland, on the drying peats (e.g. Sinker 1962, Green & Pearson 1968, Ratcliffe 1977). Distribution "