"m20","Zonation and succession The Eriophorum mire is typically found as a replacement for the Calluna-Eriophorum mire (less often for the Erica-Sphagnum mire) in zonations and mosaics with heaths and grasslands over sequences of increasingly better-drained soils, with soligenous mires reflecting the occurrence of local flushing. The extent of replacement and the clarity of the boundaries between the community and remaining tracts of the original mire vegetation, depend largely on the intensity of the various factors mediating their interconversion. Such treatments can also affect transitions to neighbouring vegetation types and they have contributed widely to the degradation of entire landscapes in which the community is found. Around the margins of blanket bogs, on which the https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.024 Published online by Cambridge University PressM20 Eriophorum vaginatum blanket and raised mire 215 Eriophorum mire most commonly occurs, the thinning of the peat cover is generally marked by a transition to Ericetalia wet heath over gleyed podzols, or Calluno- Ulicetalia heath or Nardetalia grasslands over more free-draining podzols or rankers. Typically, such zonations occur over progressively steepening slopes, usually running downhill from summit plateaus, or sometimes uphill, where flat, peat-covered ground gives way above to rougher terrain. In the south Pennines, these sequences are seen on a grand scale, forming a crude altitudinal pattern, with local reversals where resistant grits are exposed in lines of crags (e.g. Smith & Moss 1903, Moss 1913). The kind of Ericetalia community most often found in association with the Eriophorum mire on blanket bog fringes seems to be the Juncus-Dicranum sub-community of the Ericetum tetralicis wet heath. This may be of considerable extent where the peat thins gradually or has been eroded into substantial amounts of downwash, but around abrupt mire margins this zone is often curtailed. Then, there may be a more or less direct switch to Calluno-Ulicetalia vegetation, usually some form of Calluna- Vaccinium or Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath. Very commonly, however, the grazing which plays a major part in the development of the Eriophorum mire itself, has converted some or all of this heath vegetation to grassland, leaving strips of sub-shrub vegetation confined to more inaccessible crags and tumbles of boulders below them: this is well seen in the southern Pennines (e.g. Lewis & Moss 1911, Moss 1913). In the poor-quality swards that develop on the grazed ground around the mire, Juncus squarrosus often becomes very prominent over the more ill-drained thin peats and peaty podzols, with Nardus stricta a leading species on the drier podzols and rankers: the map of Moor House in Eddy et al. (1969) shows this kind of pattern very clearly. In other cases, as on Ilkley Moor, the unpalatable E. nigrum ssp. nigrum has spread in abundance through most of the zonations around the grazed mire fringes, masking the pattern of communities (Fidler et al. 1970, Dalby et al. 1971). Strips of Juncus-Festuca or Nardus-Galium grassland can also be found running through tracts of the Erio phorum mire where there is very slight flushing of thin peats or exposed mineral soils; and, if the waters show some amelioration of base-deficiency, small stands of Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland can occur. Stronger soligenous influence, which maintains the soils in a wetter state, is typically characterised by tracks of Caricion nigrae vegetation, often, at these modest alti tudes, the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire, dominated by small sedges or, very frequently, by Juncus effusus. These flushes may have Cardamino-Montion springs at their source, and they can unite as they flow through the mire and the grasslands around to form distinct streams. More stagnant wet areas within stands of the Erio phorum mire are generally scarce but occasional pools may have species-poor Rhynchosporion vegetation like that of the Eriophorum angustifolium, Sphagnum cuspidatum ! recurvum or Carex rostrata-Sphagnum recurvum communities. Two other kinds of surface patterning can be found where the Eriophorum mire occurs on blanket bogs. Quite commonly, the community is seen in mosaics with the Calluna-Eriophorum mire, the disposition of the two vegetation types and the sharpness of the boundaries between them reflecting the pattern of treatments. Sometimes, the separation of the two along a fence-line provides striking testimony to the importance of grazing in mediating change between them, but often the transitions are less well defined, reflecting gradual reductions in grazing intensity, for example, in moving away from adjacent stretches of more palatable grasslands (e.g. Pearsall 1941, Eddy et al. 1969, Rawes 1983). In certain cases, zonations between the two communities may be temporary, their boundaries shifting with variations in grazing or where there is recovery after burning. And, even where the existence of Eriophorum mire seems to be well established, it has been shown that the process of impoverishment can be reversed: at Moor House, enclosure and freedom from burning has allowed a convincing progression back to Calluna-Eriophorum mire within the space of 25 years (Rawes 1983). Enclosed Juncus squarrosus swards there, perhaps der ived by very heavy grazing of blanket mire on thinner peats, have also begun to show the same development (Rawes 1981). It is very doubtful whether the Eriophorum mire so common throughout the southern Pennines could show the same kind of recovery, for here, quite apart from the very thorough floristic impoverishment, there is particularly severe erosion of the underlying peats. This introduces a further element of patterning into the vegetation cover, fragmenting the Eriophorum mire itself and lead ing to the development of mosaics of the two sub communities over the more intact haggs and their wasting margins. It can also precipitate a progression from the Calluna-Cladonia sub-community to dry heath along the freely-draining tops of the drainage channels and tumbling masses of dry peat over their sides and, where there is extensive marginal wasting, lead to a replacement of mire vegetation by Juncus-Festuca grassland over the redistributed materials. Sometimes, there is very patchy regeneration of the mire within more gently-sloping channels, or where their blockage has induced some stagnation, but usually, where these are not entirely bare, they contain fragments of Caricion nigrae vegetation like the Carex echinata-Sphagnum https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press216 Mires mire, extending back, as erosion progresses, into the heart of the bog. Where the Eriophorum mire occurs more locally on raised bogs, it generally appears to replace the Erica- Sphagnum mire and may form a mosaic with surviving fragments of this where treatment has not been so thoroughgoing. Around the mire margins, there is typi cally a transition to Junco-Molinion vegetation on the rand, with overwhelming dominance of E. vaginatum passing to equally uncompromising dominance of Molinia caerulea. In much-disturbed situations, the lagg vegetation beyond this may become markedly eutrophi- cated but, in some sites, impoverished Eriophorum mire occurs in close contact with a rich assemblage of soligenous vegetation, as at Malham Tarn (Sinker 1960, Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975). Drying of the peats under the community in raised bogs, often accentuated by peat-cutting and draining, can favour a spread of Junco-Molinion vegetation which, with removal of grazing, can progress to Betula-Molinia woodland. Distribution "