"m21","Zonation and succession The Narthecio-Sphagnetum occurs in mosaics and zonations with other vegetation types in relation to the height of the water-table and the degree of soligenous influence within valley mires, the overall configuration of which is strongly dependent on local topography. With con tinued autogenic accumulation of peats, the community probably progresses naturally to some kind of woodland and draining may speed this succession. Often, however, together with burning and grazing, it has led to degradation of the vegetation. The fully-developed sequence of communities in which the Narthecio-Sphagnetum occurs is very distinctive (e.g. Rose 1953, Newbould 1960, Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975, Wheeler 1983). First, within tracts of the community itself, there can be some measure of surface-relief, with a patterned distribution of the Sphagna and vascular plants over drier and wetter ground and transitions to Rhynchosporion vegetation in pools proper. Characteristically, this latter is of the Sphagnum auriculatum type, the pools often surrounded by a zone of Rhynchospora alba (sometimes with R. fused) and showing a switch to dominance of S. auriculatum and S. cuspidatum in the ground carpet, with an appearance of plants like Menyanthes trifoliata, Potamogeton polygonifolius and Utricularia spp. It is in the transition zone to such pools that Hammarbya typically occurs. https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.025 Published online by Cambridge University PressM21 Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley mire 223 Where such wetter areas show some measure of soligenous influence, Littorelletea vegetation is often found, with P. polygonifolius, Eleocharis multicaulis, Juncus bulbosus[fluitans and Hypericum elodes. These can mark out small seepage areas around the edge of the Narthecio-Sphagnetum or water-tracks within stretches of the mire, but quite often the Littorelletea vegetation forms a distinct zone inward of the Narthecio-Sphagnetum towards the central mire axis. Continuing this zonation towards the zone of maximal soligenous influence, there can be a strip of Caricion nigrae poor fen and then a central line of Betula-Molinia woodland; in valley mires with somewhat more base-and nutrientenrichment, the last two may be replaced by Caricetum paniculatae swamp and Alnus-Carex woodland (Figure 17). In the opposite direction, towards the fringes of the mire, the Narthecio-Sphagnetum typically gives way to the Ericetum tetralicis. With the move to the periodically-waterlogged shallow peats and peaty gleys that cover the surrounding slopes, the carpet of luxuriant Sphagnum papillosum is replaced by patchy S. compactum and S. tenellum, species such as Er iophorum angusti- folium, Narthecium and Drosera rotundifolia thin out and the canopy of ericoids becomes denser. Small patches of wet sandy peat in the transition zone are sometimes picked out by the striking Rhynchospora- Drosera sub-community of the Ericetum, with its occasional Lepidotis inundata and crusts of the purple alga Zygogonium ericetorum s.l. Beyond the wet heath, the basic sequence continues into dry Calluno-Ulicetalia heath of some kind. Complete zonations of this type are best seen in some of the New Forest valley mires, as at Wilverley, Holms- ley and Matley bogs and in the Denny/Shatterford system (Rose 1953, Tubbs 1968, Ratcliffe 1977, NCC New Forest Bogs Report 1984), and on certain south Dorset heaths (Ratcliffe 1977). In other sites, the sequence of communities is incomplete because of differences in topography and hydrology: at Thursley Common, in Surrey, for example, the Narthecio-Sphagnetum terminates the zonation below, forming a rather extensive stretch of bog like a raised mire (Rose 1953, Ratcliffe 1977) and on Aylesbeare Common, in Devon, stretches of the community mark out more strongly waterlogged ground over gently-undulating topography with a complex mosaic of wet and dry heaths (Ivimey- Cook et al. W15). Quite frequently, too, the general zonation is complicated by the occurrence of other vegetation types which reflect differences in base-or nutrient-richness of the substrates and waters. Tracts of Junco-Molinion grasslands, sometimes dominated by Myrica, can be found at some sites below the Narthecio-Sphagnetum, where soli genous influence increases, or cutting through it, where there is some channelling of flow down the slopes (Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975). Then, in certain New Forest mires, notably at Cranesmoor (Newbould 1960), on Figure 17. Zonation around a typical lowland valley bog in southern England. M6 Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire Ml6a Ericetum tetralicis wet heath, Typical sub-community M2 la Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bog, Sphagnum- Rhynchospora sub-community M29 Hyperico-Potametum soakway W4 Betula-Molinia woodland H2 Calluna-Ulex minor heath H3 Ulex minor-Agrostis heath https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press224 Mires Hartland Moor in Dorset (Ratcliffe 1977) and at Ayles- beare (Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975), the Narthecio-Sphagnetum gives way to the Schoenus-Narthecium community along the central mire axis. In the ‘mixed mires ’ found on some north Norfolk commons, like Roydon, where valleys have cut down through sands and gravels to Chalky Boulder Clay, there is a more marked shift from the community to calcicolous fen-meadow and fen, with vegetation types like the Cirsio-Molinietum and Schoenetum bordering the mire axis (Rose 1953, Daniels & Pearson 1974, Wheeler 1975). Towards the north and west, there is an increasing tendency for the Narthecio-Sphagnetum to be less well characterised floristically and for stands to survive in fragmentary form within much-altered landscapes. Even in the south-east, treatments have had some dras tic effects and losses of the community, with heathland reclamation, have probably been extensive. Severe fires sometimes cause local damage to the Sphagnum carpet with a run-down of the vegetation to the Ericetum tetralicis and, where stock are turned on to the community in large numbers, trampling and manuring may precipitate a succession to poor fen (Rose 1953). But draining has been particularly destructive and, even where this has not been followed by improvement for agriculture or forestry, it has induced substantial changes. Essentially, it speeds up what is probably naturally a rather slow process of surface-drying with autogenic peat accumulation: lowering the water-table encourages the invasion of woody plants, among which Betula spp. and Pinus sylvestris are generally prominent, and makes the vegetation more susceptible to the effects of burning. Under such conditions, what was once Narthecio-Sphagnetum often presents a sorry spectacle of scrubby woodland and impoverished Ericetum and dry heaths.Distribution "