"m22","Zonation and succession The Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow is found with a wide variety of swamps, tail-herb fens, other mires and grasslands and woodlands in zonations and mosaics which reflect interactions between edaphic variation and treatments. Many such sequences now bear signs of neglect or disturbance and are often truncated above by im provement of the soils, occurring as isolated fragments within intensive agricultural landscapes. The abandonment of traditional treatments has also allowed many tracts to progress to scrub or woodland in renewed successions. The most extensive sequences in which the Juncus- Cirsium fen-meadow is found occur in large topogenous mires, like the flood-plain fens of Broadland, where the Iris sub-community once formed an important part of the patchwork of mowing-marsh. Concentrated on the drier fen margins and maintained by annual summercutting for litter, such vegetation typically gave way over the more extensively-flooded peats to the Peucedano- Phragmitetum or the more species-poor Phragmites- Eupatorium fen, different compartments variously treated for crops of Phragmites, Cladium or Glyceria maxima, according to the timing of mowing and the trophic state of the substrates. And, beyond such com munities, around the open waters, and penetrating between the compartments along the actively-maintained dykes, were stands of swamps, such as the Phragmitetum, the Glycerietum maximae or the Cladie- tum (Pallis 1911, Lambert 1946, 1951, 1965). Such vegetation patterns are now in a state of almost universal neglect, with the various dominants reasserting themselves strongly among the secondary fen and Phragmites re-invading the fen-meadows (Wheeler 1975). The boundaries between the fen compartments have been further obscured by the choking of dykes and by the invasion throughout of shrubs and trees. Most of the developing woodland approximates to Salix-Betula- Phragmites fen carr, the kind of wet forest which develops in most primary hydrarch successions over more base-rich peats in lowland Britain, and towards which secondary successions tend to converge when restraining treatments are withdrawn (Figure 18).In some stretches of Broadland, around Hickling, Sutton and Wheatfen broads, for example (Wheeler 1975), such mosaics as these can still be seen in less obscured form and at Wicken Fen some of the mown droves have thin strips of this kind of Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow running between the compartments. Else where, smaller fen basins, like those in Norfolk and Anglesey, and alluvial terraces along chalkland streams, have narrow sequences of fen-meadow, fen and swamp of this basic type. Spring-fed hollows in East Anglia, too, can show compressed zonations from the Caricetum elatae swamp to the Carex elata sub community. In such cases, grazing often maintains a short sward, although larger sedge tussocks may provide a niche for the scattered invasion of woody plants. Although grazed Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow was once an extensive component of the vegetation cover on some flood-plain mires, forming a striking contrast to the mowing-marsh around (Lambert 1948), it is now generally found as small stands marking out waterlogged hollows, seepage lines and springs within enclosed pastures. Where stock penetrate far and regularly on to the wetter ground, the vegetation is usually of the Briza-Trifolium type, although there can be con siderable floristic and structural differences both within and between stands according to the pattern of flushing and the intensity of grazing. The sharpness of the boundary between the fen-meadow and surrounding sward is also variable, depending on the gradient of soil moisture and whether there have been attempts to improve the pasture around. Often, the context is a Cynosurion grassland, like the ubiquitous Lolio-Cyno- suretum or, on less-improved ground, the Cemaureo- Cynosuretum, both of them agricultural swards of brown soils with free to moderately impeded drainage such as frequently surround flushes and waterlogged hollows with fen-meadow developed over shale and clay landscapes. With such grasslands, the Briza-Trifolium sub-community shows a strong floristic continuity through mesophytic herbs such as Holcus lanatus, Fes tuca rubra, Ranunculus acris, Trifolium repens, Ceras- tium fontanum, Prunella vulgaris, Centaurea nigra and Cynosurus cristatus, so the general effect in moving out of the flush is of a loss of rush and sedge dominants and Molinietalia herbs and a supplementing of the general Molinio-Arrhenatheretea element with a prominent Cynosurion component. In other cases, where springs or waterlogged hollows punctuate a landscape dominated by pervious limestones with rendzina soils, the floristic switch around the fen-meadow is to a Mesobromion sward, usually of the Festuca-Avenula type, with species such as Briza media, Carex flacca, Centaurea nigra and Trifolium pratense providing a link. Sometimes, where base-richness of the soils is pronounced, such grassland may provide a context for a wider range of wetter https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.026 Published online by Cambridge University PressM22 Juncus subnodulosus-Cirsium palustre fen-meadow 235 calcicolous communities around areas of soligenous influence, not only fen-meadow of the Briza-Trifolium type, but also the Schoenetum or, towards northern Britain, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum. In some sites of this type, too, the Cirsio-Molinietum fen-meadow can figure in such mosaics, characteristic of somewhat drier soils than these springs and extending on to less base-rich ones. Its floristic similarity to the Juncus-Cirsium fen- meadow is considerable and in some cases it may have been derived from it by selective nutrient depletion with long-continued treatment. Reduction of grazing in the Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow results in an expansion of the bulky dominants and ranker grasses and an overwhelming of the smaller herbs, producing vegetation like that of the Typical sub community. Patches of this can often be found within stands of the Briza-Trifolium sub-community, marking out less-frequented areas of ground, which then acquire some resistance to the reduction of the rough herbage which develops. In other cases, whole springs and hollows, more or less totally free of grazing, in field corners or alongside streams, can be occupied by this kind of fen meadow, sharply delineated from the hea vily-cropped pasture around or, where neglect has extended on to drier ground also, grading to some kind of Arrhenatheretum, with plants such as Festuca rubra, Holcus lanatus, Lotus uliginosus, Vicia cracca and Lathy-Figure 18. Changes in fen and meadow zonation with improvement and neglect. In the foreground is a traditional sequence in an openwater transition mire from Phragmitetum swamp (S4), through mown Peucedano-Phragmitetum (S24) and Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow, Iris sub-community (M22d) to grazed Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow, Briza- rus pratensis providing some floristic continuity, but dominance passing to Arrhenatherum elatius and Moli- nietalia tall herbs being replaced by Arrhenatherion umbellifers such as Heracleum sphondylium and Anthris- cus sylvestris. Quite often, too, in such situations as this, the soils are sufficiently eutrophic to allow plants such as Epilobium hirsutum and Urtica dioica to gain a hold once grazing is relaxed and dense patches of these may be found among mosaics of these two communities. Indeed, a neat experiment described by Wheeler (19836; see also Wheeler et al. 1985) has shown how an enclosed Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow was fairly rapidly replaced by dense E. hirsutum, except where pronounced waterlogging of the ground maintained ferrous ions at a level toxic to this tall herb, but still harmless to J. subnodulosus and its associates. Enrichment of ground waters by the washing out of fertilisers, now a very common feature of the lowland agricultural landscape in Britain, is likely to increase this kind of development in ungrazed stands. The Typical sub-community of the Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow, with its rank herbage, is perhaps rather resistant to rapid invasion by woody plants and succes- sional developments subsequent to withdrawal of graz ing have not been followed. Wetter spring-fens are likely to be invaded by much the same mixture of shrubs and trees as are characteristic colonists in topogenous fen-Trifolium sub-community (M22b) and Centaureo- Cynosuretum (MG5). With enclosure and improvement of the drier ground, the last is converted to Lolio-Cynosuretum (MG6), while neglect of the mowing marsh leads to spread of rank Typical Juncus- Cirsium fen-meadow (M22a) and secondary Salix- Betula-Phragmites woodland (W2). https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press236 Mires meadow, producing Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland, but even in such cases, many stands are so small as to be probably marked out in subsequent woodland cover by just small patches of willow and birch within predominantly drier vegetation. Stands on ground which is not quite so thoroughly waterlogged would perhaps progress eventually to Fraxinus-Acer-Mercur- ialis woodland, whose Deschampsia cespitosa sub community, when coppiced, produces a field layer which has some floristic similarity to the Juncus-Cirsium fen meadow. Extensive abandonment of ground, where such serai processes might be studied, has in fact been very unusual in the recent decades of vigorous land improvement and very often now, neglected Juncus- Cirsium fen-meadows remain isolated fragments closely hemmed in by much-altered pastures or arable land. Themselves originally of agricultural origin and rarely of spectacular richness, even when less overgrown, they nonetheless frequently provide an important remnant habitat for wetland species which were formerly much more common. Distribution "