"m23","Zonation and succession The Juncus-Cirsium rush-pasture occurs in zonations and mosaics with a variety of grasslands, mires and heaths, the disposition of the vegetation types usually reflecting variations in soil conditions and treatments. The community can subsist in non-intensive agricultural landscapes but improvement has destroyed many stands, or altered or truncated zonations. With neglect, improved swards can revert to this kind of vegetation and the community, in turn, progress to woodland. Around the upland fringes of western Britain, the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture is still an important and extensive component of less-improved grazing land, both within and beyond the limits of enclosure. Its contribution to the vegetation cover in such predominantly pastoral landscapes is dependent on the drainage pattern, controlled by such natural factors as geology and relief, so where there has been no improvement of drainage the disposition and size of stands remain effective markers of the extent of impedence over gentle slopes with impervious substrates. And the commonest type of zonation is then to calcifuge grasslands of one sort or another, with increasing freedom of water move- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.027 Published online by Cambridge University Press250 Mires ment in the profile, a change often indicated by increase in slope, in other cases by a switch in parent materials, or both. Alternations of shales with pervious sandstones present one kind of underlying geological pattern, fairly common in the palaeozoic deposits of western Britain, but frequently it is the distribution of ill-draining drift, lodged on plateaus, moderate slopes and choking small stream-beds, that controls the occurrence of the community. In edaphic terms, these zonations are usually marked by a change from some sort of gleyed profile under the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture, to a brown podzolic soil or podzol, carrying a Nardo-Galion grassland. With increasingly free drainage, and greater tendency to surface eluviation, the rushes and Molinietalia associates drop out, leaving herbs such as Anthoxanthum, Festuca rubra, Agrostis capillaris and Potentilla erecta, as mainstays of some kind of Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland. Junctions can be sharp, where underlying edaphic conditions change suddenly, but often they are fairly gentle, as where drift influence alters gradually or where the penetration of stock creates a transitional mosaic zone between clumps of rushes. The surveys of King (1962; see also King & Nicholson 1964) include some of these intermediate swards from southern Scot land and, in the data from Moor House (Eddy et al. 1969), transitions to grasslands with much Nardus can be seen, a quite widespread feature at such higher altitudes. At this site, too, and also around Cader Idris (Edgell 1969), some of the surrounding swards are flushed with the more base-rich water which gleys the soils under the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture, and here the zonation can be to Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, into which Nardo-Galion herbs and such plants as Carexpanicea, Cirsium palustre and Agrostis canina ssp. canina can extend. Although the Juncus-Cirsium rush-pasture is only slightly mesophytic, transitions such as these probably involve a switch to soils which are somewhat more oligotrophic than the gleys. Within enclosed agricultural land, however, the surrounding swards have often received some fertilising, even if only from the stock which, in this kind of mosaic, give most of their attention to the drier grasslands, or from artificials such as basic slag. Then, a Cynosurion element may become prominent in the transition, with, say the Holcus-Trifolium sub-community of the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland surrounding the rush-pasture, or, where there has been more assiduous improvement with some top-sowing, the Anthoxanthum sub-community of the Lolio- Cynosuretum. Cynosurion species may drift into the rush-pasture, blurring the boundaries, and the next stage of improvement is for draining of the gleys to facilitate the extinction of the rushes and their Molinietalia associates and the reclamation of the entire sward. This has been a very widespread practice, particularly over less intractable ground at lower altitudes, and though blocking of drains can allow relatively rapid reversion to the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture, many stands have been permanently destroyed. Beyond the limits of enclosure, where the community can be found at moderate altitudes, the stagnohumic gleys on which it characteristically occurs often form intergrade soils between brown podzolic profiles and peats proper (Avery 1980). In some situations, the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture can thus be seen as part of a more extensive transition right through from Nardo- Galion swards to blanket mire with the thickening of the organic horizon from mor humus, through humose top soil to ombrogenous peat. In such places, the community may be preferentially grazed along with stretches of Festuca-Agrostis-Galium or Nardus-Galium grasslands as the most productive and palatable vegetation types, so the switch to the peat vegetation is often marked by the appearance of ericoids, first in the Scirpus-Erica wet heath, then in Erico-Sphagnion mire. In these kinds of zonations, as at Moor House (Eddy et al. 1969) and on Cader Idris (Edgell 1969) the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture often occurs in quite well-defined stream-side stands running through the tracts of peat. Then, it can be seen as a mesotrophic equivalent to rush-dominated types of Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire. Where such streams are surrounded by gently-flushed stretches of peat, and particularly where the vegetation has been burned over and grazed, Molinia-Potentilla grassland can form an extensive fringe to the community. In the lowland landscape, too, the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture can be found with wet heath and mires on peats, where soligenous conditions develop in ill-draining valley bottoms with gleying of their surrounds. Indeed, within stretches of more improved agricultural landscapes, such areas, sometimes preserved as common-lands, as on Gower and in Pembrokeshire (Meade 1981), can include most of the transitions of this kind. In these localities, the wet heath can be represented by the Ericetum tetralicis, with the Succisa-Carex community of which the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture has much in common, and this can grade in waterlogged hollows to the Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bog with Hyperico-Potametum soakways. Again, Mo/zwzYz-domi- nated vegetation can supervene in such transitions where gentle slopes have some modest flushing or where burning and grazing have favoured its spread. In the south-west of Britain and south Wales, this may be far- flung stands of the Cirsio-Molinietum where there is some base-enrichment in the ground waters but, usually, it is some kind of Molinia-Potentilla mire. Where this adjoins the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture, transitions between the two can be very gentle or form complex mosaics of dominance by rushes and Molinia (e.g. Meade 1981, Ratcliffe & Hattey 1982: site type V). Topogenous hollows in the lowlands can also show https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.027 Published online by Cambridge University PressM23 Juncus effusus /acutiflorus-Galium palustre rush-pasture 251 zonations from the community to vegetation on peat, where the latter accumulates under the influence of a more or less permanently high water-table. In such situations, the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture can form a fringe around Phragmitetalia fen, into which the Junci can extend some way, but where continuity is seen mainly through tall dicotyledons like Cirsium palustre, Angelica sylvestris and Filipendula ulmaria, and other herbs such as Galium palustre, Ranunculus flammula, Mentha aquatica, Cardamine pratensis, Hydrocotyle vul garis and Epilobium palustre, with a switch in dominance to helophytes, notably Phragmites australis or, quite commonly around open-water transitions in the western parts of Britain, Carex rostrata. Reed-dominated vegetation is often of the Phragmites-Eupatorium fen, the outward spread of Phragmites often being curtailed by grazing ahead of its edaphic limit (site types VII & VIII, Ratcliffe & Hattey 1982); while an increase in C. ros trata, together with Potentilla palustris, Menyanthes trifoliata and Equisetum fluviatile, all of them occasional in the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture, usually marks a transition to the Potentillo-Caricetum (site type IV, Ratcliffe & Hattey 1982). Where stock, usually cattle in these situations, come down to water at such fen stands within enclosed pastures, the Juncus-Galium fringe is typically a much-puddled zone. Transitions from the community to Phragmites- Eupatorium fen can also be seen on the unimproved margins of sluggish streams and rivers, where the Jun cus-Galium rush-pasture can persist on alluvial gleys over the terraces. Here, too, the Filipendula-Angelica tail-herb fen is often to be found on soils which are too dry to support dense Phragmites but periodically enriched by allochthonous mineral matter deposited in floods. Grazing, again, may have some influence on the transition from the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture to this Filipendulion community. Fragments of these kinds of zonations can often be seen alongside field-margin ditches and along damp hedge-banks. In all these situations, it is usually grazing, much less often mowing, which maintains the Juncus-Cirsium rush-pasture; and imprudent pasturing, with its fre quent poaching, probably enhances the hold of the community on these ill-draining soils. Where grazing is withheld, however, and there is no cutting or burning of the vegetation, serai progression can be rapid with direct invasion of woody plants, particularly of Salix cinerea and Betula pubescens, whose light fruits can be wind- borne for considerable distances, and sometimes also of Alnus, if seed-parents are close. Where a persistent phase of Filipendula- or Mö/zma-dominance does not supervene, such colonists can quickly come to prevail in stands of Salix-Galium woodland, a particularly widespread and common community of gleyed mineral soils in the western lowlands of Britain, or of Betula-Molinia woodland. With these two vegetation types, the Juncus-Galium fen-meadow can show considerable floristic overlap, sometimes surviving little changed under more open canopies. It is possible that at lower altitudes such woodlands eventually progress further by the invasion of Quercus robur. Distribution "