"m24","Zonation and succession The Cirsio-Molinietum is typically found as part of transitions between tail-herb fens or other kinds of mire vegetation on the one hand and grasslands or dry heaths on the other. Essentially, such sequences reflect variations in the soil water-regime but the particular com munities involved differ according to the base-status of the mire waters and their surrounding soils and with the regional climate. And the proportions of the different vegetation types within the zonations are very much influenced by the degree to which treatments have modified the natural patterns. Land improvement has increasingly modified the drier portions of the zonations and often destroyed the community altogether by extending drainage and reclamation right on to areas of mire. In other cases, stands remain intact but have become fragmented and isolated within intensive agri cultural landscapes. Even where larger tracts have sur vived longer, the abandonment of traditional treatments has often left them to revert to rank secondary fen and scrubby woodland. Within central and eastern England, where the usual context for the community is the surrounds of calcareous mire systems, extensive zonations are now scarce. However, it is still possible to see, at various localities in the flood-plain mires of Broadland (Wheeler 1978, 1980c) and the Fens (Godwin 1978) and along the margins of chalkland rivers in East Anglia (Haslam 1965) and elsewhere (Wheeler 1975, Ratcliffe 1977), transitions from the Typical or Eupatorium sub-communities to Phragmitetalia fen. Around the Norfolk Broads, the latter is usually some form of Peucedano- Phragmitetum, elsewhere generally the Phragmites- Eupatorium fen, and the extent and clarity of the junctions between such vegetation types and the Cirsio- Molinietum depend in large measure on how treatments have been imposed and withdrawn over the sequence of progressively drier soils through the mire. In some places, the boundaries between old mowing-marsh com partments can still be marked by fairly abrupt switches from what was fen-meadow mown for litter to tail-herb fen cut for reed or sedge. In parts of Wicken and in other reserves where mowing is used as part of the management of the vegetation, such transitions remain crisp and provide not only a glimpse of the once-widespread patchwork of secondary fen, but also an active indication of how one community can be transformed into another. Often, however, such patterns are now blurred by long neglect, with Phragmites re-establishing itself through the Cirsio-Molinietum and apparently capricious mixtures of fen and fen-meadow plants occurring in rank jumbles, frequently invaded by scrub. Commonly, then, transitions from the Cirsio-Molinietum to Phragmitetalia vegetation have to be seen in the much more compressed sequences found in ill-drained field corners and along marginal ditches, where it is grazing that usually mediates the transition. Another, still fairly widespread, though increasingly local, zonation to be seen in this part of Britain occurs around the soligenous fen vegetation associated with springs and seepage lines fed by calcareous waters. In such situations, the Typical sub-community often forms a marginal zone around the Schoenetum which occupies the central area where base-richness and through-put https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.028 Published online by Cambridge University Press264 Mires are at a maximum. Grazing often occurs throughout such zonations and floristic continuity is therefore maintained through resistant small herbs whose edaphic tolerances are fairly broad. What marks the switch in vegetation types is the increasing representation of calcicoles in moving to the heart of the spring-fen, both among the vascular plants and in the bryophytes which are often well represented in the rather open areas of sward between the dominants, and the switch from a preponderance of Molinia to Schoenus. Withdrawal of grazing in such vegetation results in the development of the ranker and impoverished Festuca-Juncus sub community of the Schoenetum, which is very close in its composition to the Typical Cirsio-Molinietum and perhaps represents a successional extension of the latter into more calcareous situations with neglect. Both these types of zonations can be complicated by the occurrence of the other kind of lowland southern fen-meadow, the Juncus-Cirsium community alongside the Cirsio-Molinietum. As explained above, a combination of edaphic and treatment factors may differentiate these vegetation types, the latter apparently favouring drier ground than the former, though perhaps also being derived from it where mowing or grazing have been applied over long periods of time. Whatever the particular environmental influences on each, the com munities are certainly very close and sometimes have to be distinguished simply by the proportions of their usual dominants, J. subnodulosus and Molinia. Fen helo phytes, large sedges and dicotyledons can also occur in the Juncus-Cirsium fen-meadow, so very complex patchworks of dominance, superimposed over lower tiers of herbage which share many species in common, have to be expected in such situations: they are a reflection of floristic convergence where agricultural activities have been brought to bear around the more accessible fringes of these mire systems. Under traditional treatments, and particularly graz ing, there was often a strong measure of continuity between such fen-meadows and the vegetation of the drier ground beyond the influence of a fluctuating watertable in topogenous mires or above springs and seepage lines. This is less so now that agricultural improvement has pressed very closely around ill-drained remnants of the landscape, but in some localities good uninterrupted zonations can still be seen. In eastern England, for example, topogenous hollows in drift or springs in the Chalk sometimes pass above to rendzina soils developed from the bedrock, when the Typical sub-community can grade to some sort of Mesobromion sward, usually in this part of Britain, the Festuca-Avenula grassland or, towards central England, its derivatives dominated by Bromus erectus or Brachypodium pinnatum. Species such as Briza media, Agrostis stolonifera, Festuca rubra and some mesophytic dicotyledons like Prunella vulgaris, Ranunculus acris and Plantago lanceolata, run on into the calcicolous sward and there may be some transgression of herbs in the opposite direction, but generally speaking the boundary is quite a sharp one. Over less pervious and calcareous bedrocks, but where there has still not been very much improvement of the surrounding grassland, the Typical Cirsio-Molinietum can pass to the Centaureo-Cynosuretum, with which it is linked through plants like Holcus lanatus, Centaurea nigra, Festuca rubra, Anthoxanthum odoratum, Briza media, Potentilla erecta and Succisa pratensis. And, then, where artificial fertilisers have been applied to such swards and the land drained and perhaps top-sown or ploughed and re-seeded, a Cynosurion sward like the Lolio-Cynosureturn may surround what are simply fragments of the Cirsio-Molinietum which have not yet succumbed to improvement. Outside major areas of calcareous mire vegetation like Broadland, it is often these drier ends of transitions in which the community can be found, marking out remnant topogenous hollows within tracts of pasture. Towards south-western Britain, these latter kinds of zonations also occur but here there is a shift in the constituent vegetation types towards the more calcifuge. Thus, it is the Juncus-Erica sub-community that is the usual type of Cirsio-Molinietum that is found in moderately base-rich damper hollows in pastures around the upland fringes, and this can grade on the drier grazed surround to acidophilous sub-communities of the Lolio- Cynosuretum or Centaurea-Cynosuretum or to mesophytic types of Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland (NCC Devon Heathland Report 1980), according to the degree of improvement. More distinctive, however, is the widespread occurrence of the Juncus-Erica sub-community within heathland complexes in south-west Britain, most notably on the common lands of the Devon Pebble Beds, on the Culm in the north-west of that county and more locally on Gower. Here, in the kind of sequence well seen in the study of Aylesbeare Common by Ivimey-Cook et al. (1975), the Cirsio-Molinietum occupies sloping ground around tracts of the Ericetum tetralicis, to which it may grade through the Succisa-Carex sub-community of the wet heath, and, more locally, of the Schoenus-Narthecium mire, both of which in turn can pass over permanently waterlogged ground to the Narthecio-Sphagnetum. On drier ground, the Juncus-Erica sub-community often grades to some kind of Ulex gallii-Agrostis heath, into which Molinia runs but where E. tetralix, Calluna and U. gallii increase their cover to become major elements of the vegetation, and from which Molinietalia herbs are mostly excluded. In such zonations, expansion of the cover of Molinia can make the patterns very difficult to interpret because this tends to swamp the representation of any associates https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.028 Published online by Cambridge University PressM24 Cirsio-Molinietum caeruleae fen-meadow 265 which might give some clue as to the original character of the vegetation. Burning followed by heavy grazing is especially likely to favour the spread of Molinia on the moister ground in these sequences, and it is quite common for the Cirsio-Molinietum to occur with more impoverished vegetation with Molinia, J. acutiflorus, Potentilla erecta and perhaps occasional Cirsium palustre and Angelica, which would probably be grouped within the Molinia-Potentilla mire. This is largely a western and northern equivalent to the Cirsio- Molinietum but the ranges of the two vegetation types overlap around the upland fringes of the south-west and, in this area of transitional climate, treatments are perhaps quite readily able to convert the one into the other. In the absence of any kind of treatment, all stands of the community are probably able in theory to progress to scrub or woodland, although reversion to tail-herb fen around topogenous mires or the development of a very dense Molinia conqx may greatly hinder invasion of woody plants. The ultimate character of any woodland vegetation probably also differs according to the eda- phic conditions. In the flood-plain mires of central and eastern England, the natural successor to Phragmitetalia fen is the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland and it is possible that abandoned fen-meadow may revert to the final stages of this serai line, developing into the Alnus- Filipendula sub-community, where the influence of the base-rich ground waters is not too remote. However, long-continued mowing or grazing on somewhat drier ground may be accompanied by the surface-leaching and nutrient-depletion that favour the ultimate establishment of the Betula-Molinia woodland over neglected fen-meadow: the Juncus sub-community of that forest type can show considerable floristic similarity to the Typical Cirsio-Molinietum and birch invasion may effect a ready conversion of the one to the other. To the south-west, too, Betula pubescens is the most likely coloniser of ungrazed heaths among which the Juncus- Erica sub-community occurs, and there perhaps the Juncus or Sphagnum sub-communities of the woodland may succeed the fen-meadow. Stands of the Cirsio- Molinietum around more base-rich soligenous mires, very local to the west but widespread further east, could perhaps develop into Alno-Ulmion forest, though the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland is essentially an oceanic community rare in the drier parts of Britain. Distribution "