"m25","Zonation and succession The Molinia-Potentilla mire is a common and widespread element in the heath and moorland scenery of western Britain, occurring with other mire communities, heaths and grasslands in zonations and mosaics under the primary influence of edaphic conditions, though much affected by treatments. At lower altitudes, improvement has often grossly altered or truncated such sequences, leaving them isolated within intensive agri cultural landscapes. On somewhat higher ground, afforestation has often been centred on slopes previously occupied by the community, though many tracts remain in more intact zonations and have extended their cover on to much-burned and grazed ground. Such treatments play an important part in preventing serai progression to scrub woodland. The simplest patterns are to be seen where the Molinia-Potentilla mire marks out tracts of moist but well- aerated ground within sequences from grassland or dry heath to bog over ground which becomes increasingly ill-drained and eventually permanently waterlogged. In the less humid parts of its range, in south Wales and through south-west England, where such zonations are strongly dependent on topography, it is thus commonly found on the slopes around valley bogs, its exact position in the sequence of vegetation types depending on the conformation of the ground and the way in which seepage is affected by the permeability of the underlying deposits. Generally speaking, it occurs in such zonations at or around the level of the wet heath, interposed between the drier heaths on the podzols of the interfluves and the bog vegetation of the waterlogged peats in the valley bottoms. Where the ground drops away fairly quickly from among the former, gathering substantial amounts of seepage and channelling it down the slope, then there can be a direct switch to the Molinia-Potentilla mire over the flushed zones. In south-west Britain, Molinia finds strong representation among communities like the Ulex minor-Agrostis and Ulex gallii-Agrostis heaths, but transitions from these vegetation types are usually fairly well marked in a decisive shift in dominance to the grass, with a much reduced cover of sub shrubs. Quite often, however, where there are extensive tracts of flatter and ill-drained ground around the drier heaths, the Ericetum tetralicis wet heath supervenes between them and the Molinia-Potentilla mire, and then boundaries can be much less well defined, particularly if there is some extension of the soligenous influence back into the wet heath. Then, the Angelica sub-community of the Molinia-Potentilla mire can grade imperceptibly to the Succisa-Carex sub-community of the Ericetum, taller herbs, clumps of rushes and an over-canopy of Myrica sometimes providing a strong visual continuity throughout and masking the gradual move in dominance from the grass to a more mixed cover of Molinia and ericoids. Downslope, where the levelling of the ground in such terrain leads to permanent waterlogging and the accumulation of deeper acid peats, the Molinia-Potentilla mire is typically replaced by the Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bog. To such vegetation, the Erica sub community can form a gradual transition and Molinia itself persists with high frequency into the bog, but it becomes non-tussocky and grows ever more weakly in the stagnant conditions and the Sphagnum cover, dotted with abundant Narthecium and Drosera rotundifolia, extends to form a luxuriant carpet. In many larger valley mires of this kind, there is also a longitudinal zonation between these two communities, the Narthecio-Sphagnetum being concentrated towards the stagnant head of the valley and giving way downstream, with increasing channelling of the waters, to the Molinia-Potentilla mire, though sometimes persisting over a marginal zone of stagnation between it and the surrounding Ericetum tetralicis. Further complexities arise in such patterns where there is some variation in the base-richness of the seepage waters because of geological heterogeneity. A slight rise in pH within such flushed ground in southwest Britain is generally marked by the occurrence of the Cirsio-Molinietum which, in its distinctive Juncus-Erica sub-community, comes very close in its composition to the Molinia-Potentilla mire and which can occur adjacent to it or replace it in neighbouring, but more base rich, seepage zones. Schoenus can figure patchily in such situations and sometimes thickens its cover in strongly irrigated mires as the dominant in the distinctive Schoenus-Narthecium community or, where the waters are more base-rich, in vegetation resembling the Schoenetum though usually without J. subnodulosus. Sequences of this kind, occasionally complete, often in part and sometimes disposed in complex mosaics over gently undulating terrain with complex hydrology, are a very characteristic feature of the heathlands of southwest Britain. The Molinia-Potentilla mire can be seen, represented to a greater or lesser degree, where such patterns have developed over the Eocene clays, sands and gravels of the New Forest and Dorset (Ratcliffe 1977), the Triassic deposits of the Devon Pebble-Bed Commons (well shown in Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975), the Carboniferous rocks of north-west Devon (NCC Devon Heathland Report 1980) and Gower, and on Silurian and Ordovician rocks, variously smeared with drift, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.029 Published online by Cambridge University PressM25 Molinia caerulea-Potentilla erecta mire 277 through west Wales (Meade 1981). And analogous, though rather striking, zonations are to be found over the serpentine and gabbro of the Lizard (Hopkins 1983), where the community occurs among dry and wet heaths in both of which Erica vagans figures prominently. Northwards in this western part of Britain, the basic pattern of vegetation types in such sequences is pre served but, with the increasing rainfall, there is an extension of the wetter components of the zonation out of the narrow topographic confines characteristic of the south-west, and a switch to the sub-montane analogues of many of the communities. Even on Gower, much of the wet heath begins to resemble the Scirpus-Erica community, which replaces the Ericetum tetralicis in north-west Britain and which mantles many of the thinner peat soils through the upland fringes, forming an intergrade between a variety of sub-montane heaths and grasslands on podzolic profiles to blanket bog, usually the Scirpus-Er iophorum mire, on deep ombroge- nous peats. Typically, in this kind of landscape, the Molinia-Potentilla mire marks out water-tracks running through this zonation, channelling seepage from the bog or wet heath and carrying it downslope through the drier heaths and grasslands, or gathering it from shedding slopes above the bog and debouching it on to its surface (e.g. McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Edgell 1969). Again, though Molinia occurs frequently in the bog and wet heath vegetation in such zonations, its abundance usually increases very markedly over the soligenous zones, so the boundary of the community is often clear. However, as before, where seepage extends back into the wet heath, transitions can be less well defined, with the Molinia-Potentilla mire grading to the Carex sub community of the Scirpus-Erica wet heath: as in southern valley bogs, Myrica can form a canopy over both these vegetation types. And, there can be analogous complications along the length of seepage tracts, with the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire and the Juncus- Galium rush-pasture replacing the Molinia-Potentilla mire according to the base-poverty of the soils and flushing waters and the extent of waterlogging as the ground levels and falls away over the hillsides. Similar kinds of vegetation, though disposed in rather different fashion, can be seen where the Molinia-Potentilla mire occurs on raised bogs in western Britain. Here, it again marks out the better-drained tracts of the mire surface, typically dominating the rand which surrounds the active plane, itself generally carrying some form of the Erica-Sphagnum papillosum mire, sometimes fringed by a zone of Scirpus-Erica wet heath, a pattern seen in classic form at Cors Goch glan Teifi (Godwin & Conway 1939) and on a smaller scale at Malham (Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975). Where well-aerated conditions are maintained in the marginal lagg of such bogs, the Molinia-Potentilla mire can extend its cover into this, but more consistent waterlogging there is often marked by the occurrence of some kind of Carex echinata- Sphagnum mire or rush-pasture. Patterns of this kind are often further complicated by treatments, particularly by burning and grazing, which have been a traditional element in the management of both the lowland heath and the upland fringes in which this community is found. Practised with care, these treatments, either alone or in concert, do little damage to the Molinia-Potentilla mire: indeed, they probably often ultimately prevent serai progression and, on moister soils, can reinforce the uncompromising dominance of Molinia by helping eliminate its associates or competitors. And it is this latter effect that is seen most fre quently in the kinds of zonations discussed above because, where the surrounding wet heaths are subject to burning and then grazed, they show a strong tendency to develop into the Molinia-Potentilla mire, extending its cover outside what would be its normal edaphic bounds. Such a succession can extend on to the deeper peats of the bog themselves and is especially likely where artificial drainage has sharpened up the loss of water from the mire plane. This was already visible at Cors Goch glan Teifi at the time of Godwin & Conway ’s (1939) study, markedly enhancing what was perhaps a natural tendency with the drying climate, and it is now very evident on, for example, the raised and blanket mires surveyed through Strathclyde by Bignal & Curtis (1981). It can be seen, too, where longitudinal drains have been put through some of the valley mires in the New Forest. Over drier ground, where the Molinia tends to be not quite so abundant and not so strongly hummocky, grazing can perhaps effect more obvious changes in the community itself. The Anthoxanthum sub-community, for example, characteristic of grazed sites, has much in common with moist Nardo-Galion swards and continued pasturing could perhaps effect a transition to that kind of grassland and, combined with draining and the application of fertiliser, convert the Molinia-Potentilla mire into a Cynosurion sward. However, where there is a tendency towards poaching of the ground here, particularly likely where moist mineral soils are heavily grazed with cattle, there is a strong likelihood of rushes spreading with the eventual development of the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture. Mosaics of these two vegetation types are very common on some of the heavily-grazed Gower commons on soils derived from Carboniferous shales. The common occurrence of scattered shrubs and trees in association with the Molinia-Potentilla mire, particularly on lowland commons where seed-parents are often close at hand, suggests that, where treatments are relaxed and where the herbage has not grown too rank, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.029 Published online by Cambridge University Press278 Mires succession to scrub and woodland could be quite rapid. Salix cinerea and Betula pubescens are the commonest woody species found in such situations though, further north, S. aurita becomes more frequent (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Prentice & Prentice 1975). The likely development in such seres would be the Betula-Molinia woodland, in the more open flushed stands of which many of the characteristic herbs here survive. The potential suitability for forestry of the soils under the Molinia-Potentilla mire, often better-drained and somewhat richer than the surrounding ground, means that tracts of the community have often been replaced, in whole or part, by coniferous plantations. This is particularly widespread in the upland fringes of the north-west where such forests have been established, often with little care for the natural configuration of the ground, cutting across sequences of wet heath and mire, but it can also be seen on certain lowland heaths, notably over some New Forest zonations. Elsewhere in the lowlands, other tracts of the community, together with neighbouring vegetation, have been lost to agricultural improvement or left as isolated fragments in intensively pastoral landscapes. Distribution "