"m26","Zonation and succession The Molinia-Crepis mire can be found in zonations and mosaics with other kinds of fen vegetation, with grasslands and woodland, disposed according to variations in the height of the water-table, in the base-richness, calcium content and nutrient status of the waters and soils, and in the pattern of treatment. Around open waters, it may be a natural part of primary hydrarch successions with some stability but, on drier ground, grazing probably plays some part in its maintenance. Pastoral mismanagement or land improvement can both destroy this vegetation, and have probably contributed to its present very local distribution. The simplest kind of sequence in which the community can be seen relates to differences in the water-regime of underlying soils. At both Sunbiggin (Holdgate 195 5b) and Malham (Proctor 1974), for example, the Molinia- Crepis mire can be seen in complex mosaics, but part of the floristic variation is controlled by the degree of waterlogging in the peats. On wetter ground in these sites, the Sanguisorba sub-community, already with a https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.030 Published online by Cambridge University PressM26 Molinia caerulea-Crepis paludosa mire 287 modest representation of Phragmitetalia plants, grades to tail-herb fen, typically in these northern basins, of the Potentillo-Caricetum rostratae. There, dominance switches to large sedges, notably C. rostrata but sometimes also C. appropinquata or a tussocky form of C. nigra, occasionally with some rushes or an overtopping canopy of Phragmites. Molinia extends hardly at all into this vegetation and the most common associates are plants like Potentilla palustris, Menyanthes trifoliata and Equisetum fluviatile, but some continuity is maintained through such associates as Angelica sylvestris, Cirsium palustre, Caltha palustris and Galium palustre. In such situations as these, however, where the mire waters are draining from catchments in which calcareous rocks predominate, here Carboniferous Limestone, wetter soils are also often more base-rich and more oligotrophic so that Caricion davallianae vege tation is a characteristic element of the sequences, sometimes replacing the Phragmitetalia fen, or occurring alongside it, where there are fine-scale variations in the quality of the incoming waters. Typically, in sites like Sunbiggin and Malham, and particularly on rather sloppy peats, the community is the Carex-Calliergon mire, many of whose plants are shared with the Potentillo-Caricetum, but which has a less prominent mesophytic element and a stronger contingent of calcicoles. Continuity with the Molinia-Crepis mire can thus be quite substantial, through plants tolerant of the middle range of pH and nutrient status, such as Molinia itself, Carex panicea, C. nigra, Succisa, Angelica, Cirsium palustre, Valeriana dioica, Caltha, Equisetum palustre and Filipendula. But with the move on to more base-rich and wetter soils, dominance passes to such sedges as Carex diandra with C. lepidocarpa, C. demissa and C. dioica appearing among the associates, and the patchy bryophyte cover of the Molinia-Crepis mire is replaced by lush carpets of larger Calliergon spp., with Campy- lium stellatum, Scorpidium scorpioides, Drepanocladus revolvens and Bryum pseudotriquetrum. On firmer, but still very wet and base-rich, peat and peaty mineral soils, the Molinia-Crepis mire grades to a different kind of Caricion davallianae fen. In mires like those at Sunbiggin and Malham, such situations are usually found around the margins, where there is flushing from the surrounding slopes through a stagnohumic gley and down on to the fen peat itself and then the Sanguisorba sub-community may extend up from the mire surface to form the flush surrounds. Over more open slopes, such a marginal position around this kind of Caricion davallianae flush is very much the characteristic location of the Festuca sub-community. Almost always, the Caricion community is the Pinguiculo-Cari- cetum dioicae, a small-sedge fen which, like flush stands of the Molinia-Crepis mire, is often kept short by grazing. Structural and floristic similarities between these vegetation types are thus often very considerable: tall herbs are rarely a feature of the Pinguiculo-Carice- tum, but such plants as Molinia, C. panicea, C. nigra, Succisa, Potentilla erecta, Equisetum palustre, Prunella vulgaris, together with Juncus articulatus and the grasses Briza media, Festuca ovina and Anthoxanthum, occur commonly in both communities. The calcicole con tingent in the Pinguiculo-Caricetum is, however, generally more striking than in the Carex-Calliergon mire, so close inspection will usually reveal that transitions from the Molinia-Crepis mire are marked by a general switch to dominance by mixtures of C. panicea with C. dioica, C. lepidocarpa, C. hostiana, C.flacca and C. pulicaris, a variety of smaller herbs such as Pinguicula vulgaris, Selaginella selaginoides, Linum catharticum, Parnassia palustris, and extensive patches of bryophytes like Bryum pseudotriquetrum, Drepanocladus revolvens, Campylium stellatum, Aneura pinguis and Ctenidium molluscum. In the opposite direction in such sequences as these, increasing dryness of the ground is often marked by a shift from the Molinia-Crepis mire to some kind of Nardo-Galion sward over gently-flushed brown soils developed from the drift cover that typically plasters the surrounding slopes. Through the north Pennines, such vegetation is usually the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, into which grasses like Festuca rubra, F. ovina, Anthoxanthum and Briza, together with Carex panicea, Potentilla erecta, Ranunculus acris and Prunella vulgaris, run on with high frequency. Where the drift cover is thinner and the sward more strongly influenced by the free-draining calcareous bedrock, this is replaced by the Sesleria-Galium grassland, with a more marked calcicolous element. Quite often, transitions of these kinds are further complicated by greater natural variations in the trophic state of the soils. This is clearly seen around the margins of fen complexes like those at Malham where incoming streams winding through the Molinia-Crepis mire slacken their flow and drop quantities of rich silt, but it sometimes occurs, too, at the foot of slopes where flushing waters debouch on to the flatter ground below. Then, along the levees or deltas of the deeper mineral material, the community can grade to the Filipendula- Angelica mire in which mixtures of tall mesophytic dicotyledons predominate. Such complexities as these and the way in which even simple transitions can be fragmented into mosaics with variations in water-table and base-status over mire surfaces, can obscure the fact that the Molinia-Crepis community may play a part in primary successions around open waters. At Malham, for example, stratigraphy reveals that this kind of vegetation can succeed more calcicolous fen with progressive terrestrialisation (Proctor 1974). Subsequent stages in succession have https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.030 Published online by Cambridge University Press288 Mires not been followed, though where the herbage does not become too rank, it is likely that woody plants, notably Salix spp. and Betula pubescens, could develop fairly quickly into a scrubby canopy. Towards the limit of the spread of the Molinia-Crepis mire on to wetter sub strates, such a cover would probably be of the Salix- Carex rostrata type, the usual woodland of wetter basin peats in northern Britain, where mesotrophic and moderately base-rich conditions prevail. Over drier ground, which might develop eventually within tracts of the above woodland from ombrotrophic nuclei, the Betula-Molinia woodland might succeed this. This vege tation type and, over somewhat more base-rich ground, the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland, can also be found over slope flushes around the Pennine fringes, where otherwise the Molinia-Crepis mire might be expected, and these too may represent natural successors to it, showing considerable floristic similarities. In drier situations, grazing undoubtedly plays some part in arresting these serai progressions and some stands may represent the more or less direct result of past woodland clearance and pasturing. In this respect, the presence of plants like Anemone nemorosa and Ranunculus auricomus in the community is interesting, and the general similarity to the Anthoxanthum-Gera- nium grassland, essentially a mown derivative of the flush woodlands mentioned above, noteworthy. Under moderate and judicious grazing, the Molinia-Crepis mire is probably stable but careless sward management or improvement can produce marked changes. With heavy grazing over impeded soils, there is a strong tendency for rushes to become abundant and dunging may help effect a shift towards the Juncus-Galium rushpasture, the widespread Juncion acutiflori vegetation of mesotrophic gleyed soils in north-west Britain. In drier situations, and particularly where there has been some enrichment with manure or chemical fertilisers, the sward may begin to approach a mesotrophic Nardo- Galion grassland or a Cynosurion community and top sowing or ploughing and re-seeding can fully effect such a transformation over less intractable ground. In some places, rougher terrain has given the Molinia-Crepis mire enough protection to ensure its isolated survival but destruction with agricultural improvement has pro bably been widespread. Distribution "