"m28","Zonation and succession The Filipendulo-Iridetum can be found around springs and flushes close to the coast in zonations which largely reflect variation in soil moisture, acidity and trophic state and differences in treatment on the surrounding ground, but the most striking vegetation patterns are to be seen where the community occurs on the upper part of the sea-shore where it can pass to salt-marsh and shingle communities with an increase in maritime influence. In such habitats particularly, the Filipendulo- Iridetum appears to be a fairly natural vegetation type and one which develops but slowly to woodland. In situations set back a little from the coast, the community can be found in very much the same kind of zonations as the Filipendula-Angelica mire, especially its Juncus-Holcus sub-community. In the more oceanic parts of the country, the Juncus sub-community of the Filipendulo-Iridetum replaces that vegetation type, occupying gleyed mesotrophic soils in flushes and hollows over gently-sloping ground near the coast. Usually, the landscape context in this kind of situation is one of marginal pastoral agriculture, with the community sur rounded by relatively unimproved, grazed swards of the Nardo-Galion, like the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grass land, or of the Junco-Molinion, like the Molinia-Potentilla mire, or, where there is a sharper transition to damp, nutrient-poor peat, by the Scirpus-Erica wet heath. Where grazing stock penetrate some way on to the wetter, mesotrophic soils around the flushes, a zone of the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture may be interposed between the Filipendulo-Iridetum and the drier grasslands around, Molinietalia herbs such as Filipendula ulmaria, Angelica and Cirsium palustre running out far into the rush-dominated vegetation together with ranker grasses like Holcus and Festuca rubra. Where the land has been improved a little by fertiliser application and re-seeding, then the whole sequence of vegetation types can be shifted somewhat, with the Filipendulo- Iridetum passing to the Holco-Juncetum and thence to Lolio-Cynosuretum. Such patterns can be seen on Anglesey and have been described from Mull and Iona (Gillham 1957Z?) and from Arran (Adam et al. 1977). Over the distinctive machair topography that has developed over the raised beaches in the latter sites and elsewhere in western Scotland, a local variation on these kinds of zonations can be seen where the influence of the consolidated shell-sand overlying much of the ground becomes paramount: then the Festuca-Galium dune grassland can become prominent in the sequence, partly or wholly replacing the Nardo-Galion swards around the Filipendulo-Iridetum. Only in a few places is the Filipendulo-Iridetum contiguous with both these kinds of communities on the drier and/or less nutrient-rich soils to the landward side and also more maritime vegetation types of salt-marsh and shingle below. Very often now, where the community occurs in these latter kinds of habitats, its upper boundary is an artificial one, either a road or an abrupt transition to improved pasture or cultivated ground. Down-shore, however, the zonations are often very distinctive, particularly around the margins of the western Scottish sea-lochs. Here, Adam (1978,1981) has described a characteristic regional assemblage of salt marsh vegetation types, jiot numerous but, taken together, often species-rich, and frequently developed over rather unusual substrates, highly organic and sometimes amounting to just a thin layer of peat resting on shingle. Such sequences can be seen in whole or part in sites like Loch Ranza on Arran, Loch Gruinart and the Sorn estuary on Islay, Loch Creran in Argyll, Loch Ainort and Loch na h’Airde on Skye, Loch Kishorn, Loch Torridon and the Broom lochs in Wester Ross, on the Sutherland coast and in the Outer Hebrides (Adam et al. 1977, Adam 1978), as well as on Mull and Iona (Gillham 1957Ô) and Shetland (Hilliam 1977, Roper- Lindsay & Say 1986). In the more sheltered of these situations, the Filipendulo-Iridetum usually gives way below to one of the richer forms of the Juncetum gerardi, often the Carex sub-community, less commonly the https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.032 Published online by Cambridge University Press306 Mires Leontodon type and, although I. pseudacorus, O. crocata and F. ulmaria all stop rather abruptly with the move on to more frequently-inundated ground, there is often a strong continuity between the vegetation types in the lower tier of the herbage, with such species as Agrostis stolonifera and Potentilla anserina running throughout as a patchy carpet and Festuca rubra occurring in both. Both the Juncus and Atriplex-Samolus sub-communities of the Filipendulo-Iridetum can be found in such zonations, though the latter type penetrates further into more saline situations and shows a stronger affinity with the salt-marsh swards through the occurrence of Asteretea herbs. At some sites, the junction between the Juncetum gerardi and the Filipendulo-Iridetum is made more striking by the scattered presence of small patches of the Blysmetum rufi in wet shingly hollows and flushes, and then down-shore there is typically a transition to the Puccinellia-t\xvï fucoid sub-community of the Puccinel- lietum. On more exposed coasts, the Juncetum gerardi may be the only real salt-marsh vegetation present below the Filipendulo-Iridetum and even it may be fragmented into small patches of grasses and Potentilla anserina with Bidentetea herbs like Atriplex prostrata and Polygonum hydropiper scattered on the bare sub strate (Gillham 19576). In these Scottish sea-lochs, the salt-marsh often seems to have developed over a shingle base but where such material directly underlies the vegetation, and particularly where considerable amounts of drift-line detritus are deposited, there is a tendency for the Filipendulo- Iridetum to be represented by the Urtica-Galium sub community and for it to grade to eutrophic strandlines where the shingle becomes drier. Galium aparine, Rumex crispus (often obviously var. littoreus), Atriplex pro strata, Stellaria media, Agrostis stolonifera, Festuca rubra and Elymus repens can all provide continuity with the open assemblages of the Atriplex-Urtica strandline, a further community which adds regional distinction to these western Scottish zonations. The accumulation of marsh deposits to heights cap able of supporting the non-halophytic vegetation of the Filipendulo-Iridetum can be considered part of the continuous process of sediment accumulation, but it is hard to see the community as an end-point of marsh succession when it depends so obviously on continuous irrigation by fresh-water draining from the land. It is, rather, an oceanic mire type which happens to find its most striking expression on the maritime fringe, at the junction between fresh and saline habitats. Whether it can progress further in serai developments to scrub and woodland is a separate issue, though it is true that, on the salt-marsh fringe, exposure to winds and rare epi sodes of tidal flooding may make invasion of woody plants particularly unlikely. In some coastal situations, the Filipendulo-Iridetum can be found closely juxtaposed with alder-dominated woodland, though there is no direct evidence of the one having developed into the other. Further inland, where the community can be seen among stretches of wet scrub and woodland, such successions are perhaps more likely, though even there the dense canopy of the herbs may cast a shade inimical to seedlings and young saplings. Distribution "