"m29","Zonation and succession The Hyperico-Potametum typically occurs as small and sometimes fragmentary stands in close association with bog, wet heath, poor fen and aquatic vegetation in zonations and mosaics which probably reflect the duration and extent of inundation and the base-and nutrient-richness of the ground waters. With continuing https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.033 Published online by Cambridge University Press312 Mires impoverished conditions, it is probably essentially stable, though in transitional situations grazing may be important in curtailing any successional developments. In its most common situation on valley mires in southern and south-western Britain, the community is usually found within or around tracts of the Narthecio- Sphagnetum, the characteristic vegetation type of the acid peats of this region accumulating under stagnant waterlogging. Where lines of surface seepage across the peats are clear, the mosaic of communities can be accordingly well-defined, with patches of the dominant H. elodes and P. polygonifolius picking out the stands, scattered over or snaking across the bog. But, in other cases, where the influence of the trickling and fluctuating waters is diffuse, transitions are much less obvious, with Sphagnum auriculatum and such herbs as Narthecium, Drosera rotundifolia, Eriophorum angustifolium and Rhynchospora alba providing strong continuity with the wetter lawns of the mire surface and its Sphagnum auriculatum bog pools. Quite often, these kinds of Hyperico-Potametum soakways are concentrated in a distinct zone on such valley mires. Sometimes, where waters seeping from the slopes around are channelled along the bog edge, the community marks out a marginal belt between the Narthecio-Sphagnetum and the Ericetum tetralicis wet heath that characteristically occupies the seasonally gleyed soils of slightly higher ground. In other situations, it can occur along the inner side of the Narthecio- Sphagnetum, between it and an axial strip of swamp and woodland: here there can also be some seepage and fluctuation of waters, but little enrichment beyond the immediate fringes of the central line of the mire where flow is concentrated. In both these types of zonation, variations on which are well shown in the NCC New Forest Bogs Report (1984), the Hyperico-Potametum is usually clearly marked off from the wet heath, swamp and woodland communities that bound it on the side away from the Narthecio-Sphagnetum. But, where there is gradual enrichment of the waters as they flow from less impoverished ground, or concentrate the nutrients from ever- wider areas, transitions can be more complex. Then, some kind of poor-fen or Junco-Molinion vegetation often occurs in close association with the community. Among the former, the Carex echinata-Sphagnum and Carex rostrata-Sphagnum mires can both be found grading to the Hyperico-Potametum, the Sphagnum carpet running throughout, but species such as C. rostrata, C. demissa, C. echinata, C. nigra, C. panicea, Juncus effusus or J. acutiflorus thickening up as dominants or co-dominants. Molinia can also be locally prominent within such vegetation, but it is much more abundant, often as vigorous tussocks, in the Molinia- Potentilla mire and the Cirsio-Molinietum, both of which, and particularly the former, can mark out zones of soligenous enrichment on somewhat drier ground adjacent to the Hyperico-Potametum, with associates such as Succisa pratensis, Angelica sylvestris and Cir sium palustre becoming frequent. Similar patterns to these latter can be found throughout the south and west of Britain, on lowland heaths and the moorland fringes, where the community marks out seepage and fluctuation zones around base-poor flushes and basins (e.g. Ratcliffe & Hattey 1982). Locally, the Hyperico-Potametum is also seen in seasonally-flooded pools within tracts of wet heath and poor fen and, where these are sufficiently deep, there can be the kind of zonation within stands of the community mentioned earlier. Such layering represents the beginning of a transition to truly aquatic vegetation that occurs more fully where soakways run out of tracts of poor fen and heath into the margins of permanent streams and pools. In the former, where there is an increase in water flow, the aquatic vegetation is often sparse, but around the shelving shores of pools and lakes, the Hyperico-Potametum can pass downwards to other Littorelletea com munities with plants like Littorella uniflora useiî, Myrio- phyllum alternifolium and Isoetes lacustris and I. setacea. Even in their more fully-developed form, such sequences probably rarely, if ever, represent a hydroserai succession and in most situations the community appears to be a stable vegetation type marking out zones where accumulation of any nutrient capital, whether by concentration of dissolved salts or by silting, is unlikely to proceed very far. Where there is some modest enrichment, grazing and trampling may help continually set back any tendency to succession. Distribution "