"m32","Zonation and succession The springs and flushes that characteristically support the Philonoto-Saxifragetum can arise in and flow through a wide variety of vegetation types around our upland fringes and through the montane zone. Either on its own, or in association with other kinds of spring, it can pass to mire, heath or grassland or, at higher altitudes, to bryophyte and lichen communities and snow-bed vegetation. It is essentially a permanent community though, at lower altitudes, could perhaps show some successional development in ungrazed situations. Very often, the Philonoto-Saxifragetum itself marks out the head of a spring or core of a flush, frequently occurring as a small stand of just a few square metres ’ extent, sometimes much less, or extending as a very narrow strip down rills and the sides of small streams. Quite commonly, a series of such stands will occur across a slope or at its foot, marking some geological disjunction, and, where these are grouped close to one another, they can form a single complex mosaic with the local vegetation types. In very vigorous springs, particularly those on steeper ground where the gradient of waterlogging can die away rapidly, boundaries between the Philonoto-Saxifragetum and its context can be very sharp with next to no floristic continuity between the vegetation types: such stark patterning is often visible in a marked colour contrast between the fresh-green of the spring and the dull-green or russet of its surrounds. In other situations, flushing is more diffuse, with the stands more extensive but much less well-defined from their context, something which is again often visible to the eye from a distance but evident at close quarters in a gradual zonation between the community and its neighbouring vegetation. Even in these latter situations, however, the typical bryophytes of the Philonoto-Saxifragetum and species such as Montia fontana and Chrysosplenium oppositifo- lium rarely extend far out of the spring or flush core and continuity is generally provided by the grasses and sedges that occur in the community. Transitions thus tend to be most gradual where flushes occur within tracts of Nardo-Galion swards such as the Festuca- Agrostis-Galium and Nardus-Galium grasslands which extend into the higher reaches of the sub-montane zone. More abrupt switches can be seen where the Philonoto- Saxifragetum occupies springs emerging in a variety of Nardo-Callunetea dry heaths, Ericion tetralicis wet heath and Erico-Sphagnion blanket mire and among Carice tea curvulae communities of high altitudes. Complications arise where the Philonoto-Saxifragetum passes to other vegetation types of waterlogged ground where the water-flow is less vigorous or where there is some increase in base- or nutrient-richness along the length of a flush or water-track, and such communi ties can form a transition zone around the spring core. At lower altitudes, the Philonoto-Saxifragetum can occur at the head of Carex echinata-Sphagnum mires but in the montane zone it is more often found in association with the Carex-Sphagnum russowii mire which can sur round a spring or rill and grade from it to Calluna- Eriophorum mire. In other cases, high-altitude stands occur with vegetation types of snow-beds or melt-water flushes and streams, such as the Sphagno-Anthelieturn, in which there is less vigorous irrigation, and the Pohlietum glacialis, where there is longer snow-lie and colder waters. Distribution "