"m33","Zonation and succession The Pohlietum is typically found with a very distinctive suite of vegetation types of late snow-beds, variation among which can be related partly to the wetness of the ground. It is sometimes the only kind of spring in such situations, but other related communities sometimes occur with it where the irrigating waters become less frigid or vigorous. Pohlietum springs can vary considerably in size, shape and numbers, but they generally occur towards the base of snow-beds, giving way sharply above to vegetation of more freely-draining ground, which may not be fully exposed by the melting snow until early summer. Here, the Poly trichum-Kiaeria community is very characteristic, providing a further locus for Saxifraga stellaris but otherwise showing little floristic continuity with the Pohlietum even in those patches where there is intermittent irrigation by melt-water or rain. Often, too, there are stands of the Salix-Racomitrium community on moister soils with much solifluction. Then, around these, on ground with less extensive snow-lie, there can be zones of the Deschampsia-Galium community and the Carex-Racomitrium and Car ex-Poly trichum montane heaths. With increasing distance from the spring-head, where snow-lie is not so long and the irrigating waters a little warmer, though still flowing vigorously, the Pohlietum may give way to the Philonoto-Saxifragetum along the melt-water rills and on the flushed ground around. Here, continuity among the herbs and some of the associated bryophytes is considerable, though there is the marked shift in dominance in the ground carpet. Where waterflow is considerably reduced, there can also be flushed banks of the Sphagno-Anthelieturn julaceae. In patterns such as these, the Pohlietum forms an integral part of a complex of vegetation types associated with one of our most extreme habitats. Particularly fine suites of the communities can be seen in the Cairngorms, on the upper slopes of Ben Alder and Aonach Mor, in the Creag Meagaidh corries and on the high slopes of the Affrich hills, all in Inverness and on Beinn Deargh and Am Faochagach in Ross. Distribution "