"m37","Zonation and succession The Cratoneuron-Festuca spring is generally found as an integral part of very characteristic sequences of our more calcicolous upland communities, developed over ground that is progressively drier. Topographic and edaphic variation over exposures of lime-rich substrates can modify and fragment such zonations and grazing and trampling also often play a part in influencing the vegetation pattern. Very commonly, the Cratoneuron-Festuca community marks out springs and seepage lines within tracts of calcicolous grasslands developed over drier rendzina soils or calcareous brown earths. Stands are typically small, frequently less than 1 m2, though more extensive banks and curtains can sometimes be found, and where there is a repeated pattern of irrigation at points along a slope, whole series of springs can pick this out. In rockier situations, where seepage occurs directly from bedding planes in exposures, the stands are often well defined, with a sharp disjunction from the surrounds but, with more diffuse irrigation, particularly over gentle slopes that are open to grazing, much more gradual transitions can be seen. The kinds of sward that surround the Cratoneuron- Festuca spring vary with the region and, within regions, with altitude. A common context is provided by the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, the typical plagioclimax pasture of moist calcareous soils through much of the north-western uplands of Britain and a community which, on the flushed surrounds of springs, can grade to the Cratoneuron-Festuca vegetation through its Carex or Saxifraga-Ditrichum sub-communities. On the https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.041 Published online by Cambridge University PressM37 Cratoneuron commutatum-Festuca rubra spring 337 limestones of the north Pennines, exactly parallel sequences can be seen between the springs and the Sesleria-Galium grassland which largely replaces the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland in this part of Bri tain, and which also has a Carex sub-community of moister soils. On the metamorphosed sugar-limestone of Upper Teesdale, the very distinctive Carex capillaris- Kobresia sub-community of the Sesleria-Galium grassland can be found in such patterns. Small-sedge fens of the Pinguiculo-Caricetum also often occur on the strongly-flushed ground around or below Cratoneuron-Festuca springs and, where this community is interposed between the spring and the grassland, much more gradual transitions can be seen through the sequence of vegetation types with bryophytes such as Cratoneuron commutatum, Bryum pseudotriquetrum and Aneura pinguis running on into the flush as a broken carpet among the now much richer herb layer. At higher altitudes, in the Scottish Highlands, for example, the Cratoneuron-Festuca spring can extend up to almost 1000 m and here it can be found among the more montane calcicolous communities like the Fes tuca-Alchemilla-Silene dwarf herb vegetation, an important context over the mica-schist slopes and banks of the Dalradian deposits. At these higher altitudes, too, there is a tendency for the Pinguiculo-Caricetum to be replaced by the Cariceto-Saxifragetum over the strongly-irrigated ground of open stony flushes below Cratoneuron-Festuca springs. In more gradual transitions between the community and the surrounds, developed over gentler slopes, trampling by grazing stock or deer often plays an important part in maintaining the characteristically open con ditions of the flushed soils. Typically, the Cratoneuron- Festuca spring itself is inaccessible to such treatment and heavy trampling is undoubtedly deleterious to the bryophyte mat. Such influences may indeed help convert the vegetation to a Caricion davallianae flush where springs occur on ground that is opened to pasturing, with an increase in the cover and diversity of smaller herbs able to exploit the lack of competition. The much richer Cratoneuron-Carex community described largely from Moor House in Cumbria (Eddy et al. 1969; see also Huntley 1979) may represent a stage in such a process. In most circumstances, the Cratoneuron-Festuca spring appears to be a permanent community maintained by the edaphic and climatic conditions of the environment and, even where long ungrazed, it is un likely that progression to any kind of woody vegetation is easy because of the impoverished character of the waters and soils. Where conditions are a little more eutrophic, however, lack of grazing could perhaps permit the spread of taller herbs. Over inaccessible dripping cliff ’s, the Cratoneuron-Festuca spring can sometimes be found with the Alchemilla-Saxifraga tail herb community, in which C. commutatum and B. pseudo triquetrum form a patchy ground layer beneath tumbling masses of S. aizoides and a variety of calcicolous and mesophytic montane herbs. Distribution "