"m38","Zonation and succession The Cratoneuron-Carex spring typically occurs as a local replacement for the Cratoneuron-Festuca spring in sequences of grazed calcicolous communities in upland Britain, where much of the floristic variation can be related to differences in topography and soils. Commonly, therefore, the community picks out defi nite springs or flushes within stretches of calcicolous swards developed over drier rendzinas or brown soils. Individual stands are often small, although where vigorous irrigation runs down-slope flushed zones can be very elongated and springs can be very numerous within quite small areas, occurring repeatedly along valley sides. Where they emerge among rockier topography, the stands can be well defined from their surrounds but often here there is quite a gradual transition to the grassland, the extent and richness of the bryophyte mat declining but many of the small herbs retaining high frequency and cover into the sward. In Upper Teesdale, it is generally the Sesleria-Galium grassland which provides the context for the Cratoneuron-Carex spring, grading to it through the Carex or Carex-Kobresia sub communities. Over somewhat less base-rich profiles both there and in Scotland, the Festuca-Agrostis- Thymus grassland can be found in similar sequences and this, too, can show transitions to the spring via its intermediate Carex sub-community. Often, a zone of the Pinguiculo-Caricetum is interposed over the strongly-flushed ground between the spring and the wet grassland, further attenuating the floristic gradation over the space of several metres, with quite gentle shifts among the bryophyte and herb layer in moving from the stagnogley to the rendzinas. At higher altitudes in the central Highlands, such vegetation types can be replaced by the Cariceto-Saxifragetum and the Festuca-Alche- milla-Silene dwarf-herb community around Cratoneuron-Carex springs. Trampling and grazing in these kinds of zonations play an important part in keeping the vegetation open and varied and may be vital in maintaining the rich calcicolous flora characteristic of the community (Eddy et al. 1969). Indeed, such treatment may help mediate a succession from the more species-poor Cratoneuron- Festuca spring to this kind of vegetation but the continuing extreme wetness of the ground probably prevents https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.042 Published online by Cambridge University Press342 Mires further development to a Caricion davallianae sward. Withdrawal of grazing is unlikely to be accompanied by a pronounced expansion of mesophytic herbs because of the impoverished soil conditions, although it is possible that some limited increase in plants such as Saxifraga aizoides, Alchemilla glabra, Filipendula ulmaria and Geum rivale could produce a fragmentary tail-herb vegetation. Distribution "