"m5","Zonation and succession The Carex-Sphagnum squarrosum mire is characteristically found in zonations and mosaics related to variation in water-level, base-status, cation and nutrient content of the waters and substrates. Such patterns can reflect a process of succession but many seem to be static at the present time. The simplest sequences are seen in open-water transitions like those described from Scottish lakes by Spence (1964) where the community typically occurs behind a front of the Caricetum rostratae (sometimes with C. lasiocarpa locally prominent) or the Equisetetum fluviatile, with the Phragmitetum sometimes represented as a bank of reed beyond the other swamps or on the transition to the mineral soils around the basin. At scattered localities, the Caricetum vesicariae is part of such zonations and the whole sequence may be terminated to the landward side by the Phalar ide turn. Sometimes, the Carex-Sphagnum squarrosum mire is an extensive component of the middle portion of these patterns, in other cases it is but a local patchy development within tracts of the Potentillo-Caricetum, perhaps representing more oligotrophic nuclei. Much more complex mosaics are characteristic of those sites where the Carex-Sphagnum squarrosum mire occurs as part of soligenous sequences. Here, below springs and around tortuous seepage lines and streams, it can form part of a perplexing mixture of poor and rich fens, notably with the Potentillo-Caricetum and the Carex-Calliergon mires, with the Pinguiculo-Caricetum on more solid base-rich peats and peaty gleys around, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press64 Mires and Filipendulion vegetation on mesotrophic alluvium, the whole closely hemmed in by Ericion tetralicis and Erico-Sphagnion vegetation on the ombrogenous deposits above the lagg. As Proctor (1974) showed at Malham Tarn, such patterns have a clear underlying structure in relation to the environmental variables discussed earlier, even though its expression at particular sites can present a superficial picture of great confusion. Further studies of this kind are needed to give a precise indication of what conditions control the development of this or that kind of poor or rich fen and how the general process of terrestrialisation interacts with the differentiation of flushed and leached areas within mire complexes. We may then be able to see where the Carex-Sphagnum squarrosum community fits in succes- sional sequences. In the kinds of mires in which it occurs, two lines of serai development seem possible. In more base-rich complexes, the community is often found in close juxtaposition with the Salix pentandra-Carex ros trata woodland, the field layer of which has much in common with this kind of mire (Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975, Lock & Rodwell 1981) and which, at Crag Lough, seems certainly to have developed from a mosaic of the Carex-Sphagnum squarrosum mire and the Potentillo-Caricetum with release from grazing (Lock & Rod well 1981). Where the balance is tipped towards the more base-poor and oligotrophic side, it is possible that some kinds of Betula-Molinia woodland (the Sphagnum or Juncus effusus sub-communities, for example) are a natural successor. The Carex-Sphagnum squarrosum mire may itself play an important part in the differentiation of more oligotrophic nuclei that are preferentially invaded by Betula pubescens, though this line of development is probably greatly speeded where mires are drained but not subject to too much surface disturbance and eutrophication of the peats. Such successions can be seen locally in lowland flood-plain mires, where different mire and woodland types are involved (Wheeler 1978, 1980c) and seem to have been extensive in the past (e.g. Walker 1970), though, at the present time, many zonations in which the Carex-Sphagnum squarrosum mire is found look to be more or less stable. Distribution "