"m6","Zonation and succession The Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire typically occurs as small stands among other mire communities, grasslands and heaths and sometimes with swamps and spring vegetation, where zonations are related to the water regime and the base- and nutrient-status of the environment. Grazing, especially where combined with drainage, can convert the community to grasslands and exclusion of herbivores would be expected to permit progression to wet scrub and woodland, though this would, in many cases, probably be slow and patchy. Where the community occurs within or alongside mires, it usually marks out linear tracks where there is an obvious channelling of soligenous waters on the sloping peat surface, as on blanket and raised mires, or around the margins, as in the lagg of raised and basin mires. It can be found in association with all the major Erico- Sphagnion communities. In more oceanic areas, it occurs with the Scirpus-Eriophorum blanket mire, where https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press70 Mires Figure 13. Base-poor flushes among mire (a) and pasture (b). M6b Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire, Carex-Nardus sub-community M6c Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire, Juncus effusus sub-community M15a Scirpus-Erica wet heath, Carex sub-community M15b Scirpus-Erica wet heath, Typical sub-community Ml 7a Scirpus-Eriophorum mire, Dr oser a-Sphagnum sub-community M23a Juncus-Galium rush-pasture, Juncus acutiflorus sub-community M25a Molinia-Potentilla mire, Erica sub-community M32a Philonoto-Saxifragetum, Sphagnum sub-community U4a Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, Typical sub-community it is usually represented by the Carex echinata or Juncus acutiflorus sub-communities, typically their Sphagnum auriculatum variants (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birks 1973). Further east, low-altitude Calluna-Eriophorum blanket mire provides a common context for the Juncus effusus sub-community, generally its Sphagnum recur- vum variant (Eddy et al. 1969). The community is also found with the Erica-Sphagnum papillosum raised mire and occasionally as a strip alongside the central zone of more acidic valley bogs with the Narthecio-Sphagnetum mire (Rose 1953). In such situations, it may occur in close association with Littorelletea pools and pass laterally to the drier mire surface with changes in the Sphagnum carpet and a switch to dominance of the vascular plants of the active plane. Rather more com plex patterns can be seen where the Carex echinata- Sphagnum mire occupies the wetter areas within tracts of degraded or disturbed peat, where it is often found with the Scirpus-Erica wet heath to the far-west (Figure 13) or the Erica-Sphagnum compactum wet heath further east, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressM6 Carex echinata-Sphagnum recurvum)auriculatum mire 71 and fragmentary recolonising vegetation, in pools and over redistributed peat and on streamside gravels and alluvium. On the gentler slopes of the upland fringes, the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire picks out seepage areas and water tracks where there is local accumulation of peat or a peaty topsoil to gleys of various kinds. Here, the sharpness of the vegetation boundaries is very variable according to the degree of flushing. With diffuse irrigation, there may be a very gradual transition to the surrounding grassland or heath; where waters emerge from vigorous springs or are channelled,into definite trickles and streams, the junctions are correspondingly sharp and stands can be clearly seen and mapped from a great distance (and from aerial photographs), particularly if the dominants are rushes or if the Sphagnum carpet is well developed. The way the distribution of the community can provide an effective indication of the drainage system is well seen on the published maps of Cader Idris in Dyfed (Edgell 1969) and of Moor House in Cumbria (Eddy et al. 1969). Where waters originate from definite springs, the community may pass upstream, and fragmentarily along its length, to the Philonoto-Saxifragetum. Laterally, around its margins, there is usually a transition to Nardo-Galion or Juncion acutiflori grasslands, or to heaths, as the peat thins to a humose topsoil over less strongly-gleyed profiles. These communities, particularly the grasslands, have some species in common with the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire and, where grazing stock have access, there may be a strong continuity among the sedges and dicotyledons, blurring the boundary. Where the community occurs on drift-smeared slopes, outlying patches of the mire may mark areas of local waterlogging in hollows and on gentle slopes, creating a mosaic with the grasslands and heaths and, where uncontrolled grazing has allowed a spread of rushes over generally poorly-drained ground, this may mask the patterning among the smaller herbs and bryophytes. Long-continued grazing, especially on naturally drier soils or where there has been some drainage, probably converts the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire to the Jun- cus-Galium mire or swards dominated by mixtures of Nardus stricta and Juncus squarrosus. And with a con certed attempt at improvement with drainage and lime and fertiliser application, lower-altitude stands can be reduced to narrow strips of wet ground within pastures of Lolio-Cynosuretum. At all stages, neglect and blockage of drains may permit a reversion. A combination of grazing on drier fringes and pro nounced waterlogging elsewhere helps prevent the es tablishment of woody plants in the community but where these get a hold, they would probably lead to the development of the Salix-Galium woodland or the wet ter forms of the Betula-Molinia woodland. Under existing conditions, however, the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire seems to be a substantially stable component of the sub-montane landscape. Distribution "