"m9","Zonation and succession The community is typically found among suites of swamps and mires whose distribution is related to the water regime of the environment and the base-status and calcium content of the waters and substrates. In some places, such zonations obviously reflect successions with increasing terrestrialisation but, in more oligotrophic situations, serai progression may be slow and, in isolated sites, woody seed-parents may be very remote. Under certain conditions, it is also possible that succession tends not to the establishment of mire forest but ultimately to ombrogenous bog. The simplest sequences in which the Carex-Calliergon mire occurs are found in open-water transitions around lakes and pools with more base-rich waters, as in limestone and drift basins towards the upland northwest. Here, the community is often fronted by stands of the Caricetum rostratae or Equisetetum fluviatile swamps (or, in parts of Scotland, the Caricetum vesicar- iae) extending out into deeper open water (Holdgate 1955/?, Spence 1964). More locally, in this kind of site, the Cladietum marisci may be represented in the zonation: it is especially well-developed in the Anglesey fens (Wheeler 1980zz, b), though in the cooler conditions at higher latitudes and altitudes becomes increasingly sparse (e.g. Holdgate 1955/?). Very commonly, the Carex-Calliergon mire forms a mosaic behind the swamp zone with the Potentillo-Caricetum, also often developed as a floating raft, within which there may also be a local occurrence of the Carex-Sphagnum squarro sum mire: through all of these, Carex rostrata, Erio phorum angustifolium, Potentilla palustris and Menyanthes may form a continuous backdrop to the differentiation of diagnostic suites of bryophytes and herbs in the various fens. Where there is any development of woody vegetation in such sequences, it is generally of the Salix-Carex type, characterised by rather diverse canopies of willows, in which Salix pen- tandra generally figures prominently, over a field layer that retains a strong floristic continuity with the sur rounding fen. A more or less complete sequence of this general type is well seen at Malham Tarn (Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975).At this site, too, it is possible to see some complications of this basic pattern. First, since base- and calcium- enrichment are strongly dependent on springs which debouch water from calcareous bedrocks (Carboniferous Limestone in this case), the Carex-Calliergon mire occurs closely juxtaposed to calcifugous mire vegetation more remote from soligenous influence or elevated above the ground water-table on ombrogenous peats. Directly comparable abrupt floristic contrasts can be seen where the community occurs locally around more base-rich flushes in stretches of blanket mire or wet heath in Scotland, where the basins are often insufficiently extensive for swamps to be represented, but where montane mires, like the Carex-Sphagnum warnstorfii community, and spring vegetation, like the Car- ici-Saxifragetum aizoidis, may also be represented (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birks 1973). Second, where calcareous conditions are maintained over shallower peats running away around the fringe of the basin, the Carex-Calliergon mire gives way at Mal ham, and around soligenous base-rich flushes on upland slopes, to the Pinguiculo-Caricetum dioicae, a community with which it shows quite strong floristic affinities but where species like Carex rostrata, C. diandra, Potentilla palustris and Menyanthes fade in importance and where there is a stronger representation of Caricion davallia- nae plants. Third, on fairly moist and firm peats or peaty allu vium where there is a greater measure of nutrient enrichment, the Carex-Calliergon mire can pass to Molinietalia vegetation in which tall herbs become consistently prominent, together with plants like Molinia caerulea and/or Juncus subnodulosus. At Malham, such vegetation is represented by the rather particular Molinia caerulea-Crepis paludosa community, as well as the more widely distributed Filipendula ulmaria-Angelica sylvestris community (Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975). Similar transitions can be seen at Sunbiggin Tarn (Holdgate 1955/?) and around some Scottish lochs (Spence 1964) and, where the Carex-Calliergon mire occurs very locally in fens in eastern England, it is generally in a context of Junco-Molinion fen-meadows (Wheeler 1980/?, c). The very distinctive occurrences of the community in Broadland preserve the general features of the swamp/ fen transitions outlined above but the vegetation types represented are somewhat different, the mosaics very intricate and their origin, as noted above, rather special. In this area, the Carex-Calliergon mire occurs in inti mate contact with various types of the Peucedano- Phragmitetum (notably the Cicuta sub-community) and was grouped within that association by Wheeler (1978, 1980«) as a distinct caricetosum. These mosaics, together with tracts of the Cladietum marisci and some speciesrich types of Phragmitetum, occupy the turf-ponds and https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391658.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressM9 Carex rostrata-Calliergon cuspidatum!giganteum mire 93 are surrounded by stretches of the Peucedano-Phragmitetum, Schoenus and Myrica sub-communities on the firmer, uncut peats. Cladium is generally the present fen dominant (and is regularly mown) and seems to have figured prominently in the relatively short successional life of this quite striking vegetation in the disused cuttings (Giller & Wheeler 1986«). Throughout its range, at least at lower altitudes and in less remote sites, the Car ex-Calliergon mire is probably a successional stage to the development of Salicion ciner- eae mire forest, to the north the Salix-Carex woodland, to the south-east the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland. The maintenance of a generally high water-table or irregular fluctuations in water-level may hinder invasion by woody plants and, in Broadland, mowing for sedge can repeatedly set back colonisation but, where the fen mat begins to emerge permanently more than a few centimetres above the water level, progression to woodland is probably potentially quite rapid. There is also the possibility that the Carex-Calliergon mire is serai to the development of poor-fen and ombrogenous mire, through the local formation of Sphagnum nuclei, a progression to the Car ex-Sphagnum squarrosum mire and selective invasion by Betula pubescens. Such a sere seems to be in operation in the Ant valley fens, where the Sphagnum sub-community of the Salix-Betula-Phrag- mites woodland forms striking islands in the fen, and it perhaps heralds the development of Betula-Molinia woodland and some kind of 5/?/ztzgwwm-dominated bog. Distribution "