"mg10","Zonation and succession The community very commonly occurs in mosaics related to patterns of soil moisture. The Typical sub community is very frequent as patches and sometimes as extensive stands in damper hollows in the Lolio-Cynosuretum and Centaureo-Cynosuretum and distinctive patterns often reflect the occurrence of ridge-and- furrow or drains that are too widely spaced, rushy strips picking out the wetter bands of soil. The Juncus inflexus sub-community is encountered in less well-drained areas within more calcareous soils in the Alopecurus-Sangui- sorba flood-meadow and the more calcicolous types of Centaureo-Cynosuretum. The Iris sub-community occurs in often very prominent patches in alluvial Lolio- Cynosuretum in western river valleys. Where the watertable rises beside streams and pools, the Holco-Juncetum may form part of a complete or partial transition from grassland to swamp, fen or inundation communities. Here, as with the field mosaics, there may be a range of intermediate types of vegetation based on the abundance of the dominant Junci. The Holco-Juncetum commonly develops by the invasion of J. effusus and J. inflexus into established or newly-seeded grasslands. A number of studies have demonstrated that J. effusus produces formidable quantities of seed (Chippindale & Milton 1934, Milton 1936, 1948, Moore & Burr 1948, Salisbury 1964) and that these are readily dispersed by wind, by animals and farm machinery after the seed-coat becomes mucilaginous, NARDO-GALION CYNOSURION MESOBROMIONFigure 10. Pastures and related rush-dominated communities in relation to soil variation. U4 MG6 CG2 Festuca-Agrostis- Galium grasslandLolio-Cynosuretum grasslandFestuca-Avenula grassland M23 MG10 M22 Juncus effusus/ acutiflorus- Galium palustre rush-pastureHolco-Juncetum rush-pastureJuncus subnodulosus- Cirsium palustre fen-meadowfree-draining soils impeded soils transitional to CALTHION JUNCION ACUTIFLORItransitional to JUNCO-MOLINION base-poor soilsbase-rich soils https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press90 Mesotrophic grasslands and by water (Richards & Clapham 1941b, Salisbury 1964). However, two conditions must be fulfilled for germination and survival of the seedlings: light and soil surface humidity (Moore & Burr 1948, Lazenby 1955«, b, Agnew 1961). Successful invasion is therefore most readily achieved in a broken or badly-seeded sward where the soil surface does not dry out, conditions which are often met in over-grazed and poached pasture or on ill-drained land that is being put down to leys. Once established, the Holco-Juncetum is not readily eradicated. Grazing alone will not reduce the cover of J. effusus or J. inflexus and both are relatively tolerant of mowing. Systematic drainage, re-seeding and fertilising probably convert the community to the Lolium-Alope- curus-Festuca flood-pasture or Lolio-Cynosuretum but careful pastoral management is necessary to prevent re infestation. Ungrazed stands may be invaded by shrubs and trees tolerant of wet soils and eventually be con verted to scrub and woodland. Distribution "