"mg3","Zonation and succession Stands of the Anthoxanthum-Geranium community occur most frequently in fields bounded by walls or fences and each subject to a more or less uniform treatment regime. Spatial zonations between the sub communities are therefore infrequent, although neg lected corners and margins of fields with either the Briza or the Bromus sub-community may show a narrow transition to the Arrhenatherum sub-community. The blue-violet flowers of Geranium pratense often mark out this sub-community in summer. On verges which have a less systematic treatment such transitions are more common and irregular. The local appearance of mire species in stands of the Anthoxanthum-Geranium community may form part of a transition to flush vegetation where drainage of soil water is strongly impeded. The types of mire involved in such sequences depend on the calcium status and pH of the ground water and include the Pinguiculo-Caricetum and the Molinia-Crepis fen. Along stream sides where there is seasonal inundation a tall-herb Filipendulion mire may terminate the sequence. The striking floristic similarity between the Anthoxanthum-Geranium community and the field layer of open stands of the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis and Alnus- Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodlands strongly suggests that this meadow vegetation has developed by canopy clearance and is maintained by annual mowing which excludes tall dominants (Pigott 1956a, Bradshaw 1962). Zonations between the community and such woodland are rare but occasionally the two vegetation types occur contiguously on identical sites separated only by a boundary wall. In Scandinavia, very similar meadow vegetation is mown in the clearings of such open woodland (Nordhagen 1928, Sjörs 1954; see ‘Affinities ’ below). Traditional treatment has maintained the community in all its richness but the vegetation of the Bromus sub community represents one stage in a process of increasing the productivity and decreasing the floristic diversity of hay-meadows in response to various combinations of fertiliser application, ploughing and re-seeding. This seems eventually to convert the vegetation to the Hol- cus-Trifolium sub-community of Festuca-Agrostis- Galium grassland or the Anthoxanthum sub-community of the Lolio-Cynosuretum. Distribution "