"mg4","Zonation and succession Stands of the community frequently show considerable variation in the abundance of particular species. Some of this is related to the distinctive bushy (e.g. S. officinalis and F. ulmaria) or tussock (e.g. larger grasses) habit of certain components but local variations in treatment, such as differences in mowing-time, continued over long periods, may also have an effect (Ratcliffe 1977). Zonations to other communities are most frequently related to differences in soil moisture status. Damp hollows in meadows sometimes show gradations to the Holcus lanatus-Deschampsia cespitosa community or to the Holco-Juncetum, especially the Juncus inflexus sub community on more base-rich soils. These in turn may give way to Carex acutiformis swamp. Sharper zonations of this kind can sometimes be seen bordering the older drainage ditches which frequently traverse the meadows or in such places there may be an abrupt switch to the Agrostis stolonifer a-Alopecurus geniculatus inundation grassland. Modern ditches around the mea dows often have linear stands of Salix spp. or Alnus on their banks. Changes in treatment practice can alter the composition of the Alopecurus-Sanguisorba community and may initiate successions to other grassland types. An extension of grazing into the spring reduces the abundance of some of the most distinctive species of the community such as Sanguisorba officinalis, Silaum silaus and Fritillaria meleagris, all of which are highly pala table. This is the major community in Britain for F. meleagris and, if grazing is continued into its flowering period in late April to early May, it cannot set seed. At Marston Meadows in Staffordshire, a change from mowing to late spring grazing over the last 20 years has extensively reduced its cover (Ratcliffe 1977). It can, however, remain dormant in the soil for a number of years and seems able to recolonise fields from margins or ditch edges. If stands are ungrazed over the winter months, coarse grasses such as Arrhenatherum elatius (in drier places) and Deschampsia cespitosa (in wetter areas) may expand and eventually form stands of the Arrhenatheretum or the Holcus lanatus-Deschampsia cespitosa community. Drainage, ploughing, re-seeding or the addition of artificial fertilisers can all have a more drastic effect on the vegetation. Combined with an increase in grazing, such changes probably convert the community to the Lolium perenne-Alopecurus pratensis-Festuca pratensis flood-pasture or to the Lolio-Cynosuretum. Distribution "