"mg5","Zonation and succession Zonations in the Centaureo-Cynosuretum are usually related to edaphic patterns and, even in enclosed fields subject to a uniform treatment, there may be soil differences which reflect heterogeneities in the parent material. Within the Galium sub-community, an increase in Mesobromion species (such as Koeleria macrantha and Sanguisorba minor) is often related to a rise in calcium content and pH as the soil thins towards limestone exposures. Such patterns are commonly part of a com plete transition from the Centaureo-Cynosuretum to calcicolous grassland on the Carboniferous Limestone of the Yorkshire Dales where meadows on till or head abut on to, or surround, rocky outcrops (cf. Ivimey- Cook & Proctor 1966b on comparable zonations in The Burren). In a similar fashion, there may be an increase of species typical of calcifugous grasslands and heaths in the Danthonia sub-community where its characteristic brown earths grade to rankers or podzolised soils over siliceous material. The patchy occurrence of Juncus spp. or F. ulmaria within stands of the Centaureo-Cynosuretum represents truncated zonations to the Holco-Juncetum or Filipen- dulion mires which are mediated by the soil moisture status. Such patterns are a common feature of meadows on undulating topography and frequently accentuate ridge-and-furrow with fragmentary strips of F. ulmaria or Juncus spp. on the less well-drained soils of the furrows. Alongside streams there may be a more com plete gradation to poor-fen vegetation. Occasionally, differences in treatment may be evident as zonations within enclosed meadows as, for example, where narrow belts of rich Centaureo-Cynosuretum remain on steeper banks within fields or around margins which have escaped improvement. Generally, however, differences in treatment style have a gradual succession- al effect upon the community which is evident in a range of intermediates between the Centaureo-Cynosuretum and more improved and productive grassland types. Two changes of practice are of particular importance. The first is an increase of grazing pressure. Growth starts quite early in the regions where the community occurs and stands may provide a valuable supplementary bite towards the end of April. If grazing is continued into the summer, and especially if it is heavy, there is an eventual decrease in the richness of the sward. Early- flowering species such as Orchis morio are then unable to https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressMG5 Centaureo-Cynosuretum cristati grassland 63 set seed and there is a gradual expansion of rosette hemicryptophytes. The occurrence of the poisonous Colchicum autumnale in stands of the community has sometimes led to their being set aside for hay but some farmers have destroyed this species so as to allow an expansion of grazing. In fact, C. autumnale is more toxic during the early part of the season than in summer (Butcher 1954). Frequent mowing of the community, as occurs in some churchyards and on some verges and lawns, appears to have a similar effect to an increase in grazing. Although such treatment may permit the survival of an impoverished form of the Centaureo-Cynosuretum, the trend is for the sward to be converted eventually to the Lolio-Cynosuretum. This change may be further encouraged by the second, now very widespread, alteration in treatment. This is the replacement of the traditional farmyard manure by artificial mineral fertilisers. These enhance the growth of the grasses to the detriment of the dicotyledons. Lotus corniculatus and Leontodon hispidus are often the first species to be lost from the vegetation but a much greater impoverishment accompanies the rise in productivity in the long term. More drastic treatments of the community involve ploughing or the use of total weedkillers such as paraquat and re-seeding to produce Lolio-Cynosuretum or various kinds of ley. Such artificial successions to pasture depend ulti mately on the maintenance of grazing. When the Cen taureo-Cynosuretum or its derivatives are ungrazed, there is an expansion of coarser grasses and an eventual invasion of shrubs. The Lathyrus and Galium sub communities seem to progress to various types of Arrhenatheretum or, on more calcareous soils, to one of the coarser Mesobromion swards. The exact nature of the succession may also be influenced by the fertiliser regime on the original meadow. Ungrazed stands of the Dan thonia sub-community may be directly invaded by heath shrubs or Ulex europeaus. The results of careless grazing are sometimes evident as mosaics of Centaureo-Cynosuretum with patches of coarse grassland or heath. Distribution "