"mg6","Zonation and succession The application of careful uniform treatment within enclosed pasture stands of the Lolio-Cynosuretum tends to minimise the occurrence of zonations. However, where past improvement has been uneven, transitions may remain. Steeper banks inaccessible to ploughing may still carry patches of Centaureo-Cynosuretum as remnants of previous meadow vegetation. Hollows resistant to drainage may have the Holcus-Deschampsia community or Holco-Juncetum ’, the Deschampsia and Iris variants of the Typical sub-community can be seen as truncated zonations to such vegetation which occur where drainage is less successful. Where rivers and pools are not embanked, the Alopecurus geniculatus variant represents part of a transition to the vegetation of regularly-inundated water margins. Where pastures have been won from rocky upland topography, there may be zonations to calcifugous grasslands (with the Anthoxanthum sub-community) or calcicolous grasshttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press70 Mesotrophic grasslands lands (with the Trisetum sub-community) as the soil thins to some type of lithomorphic profile around outcrops. The Lolio-Cynosuretum can be derived from a very wide range of vegetation types (Figure 9) including, in extreme cases, communities of stabilised sand-dunes and blanket mire. Certain kinds of agricultural treatment or neglect may allow some of the more closely related types of original unimproved vegetation to replace the Lolio-Cynosuretum. In older pastures, a return to more traditional organic manuring and the withdrawal of summer grazing may permit the re establishment of the meadow vegetation of the Cen taureo-Cynosuretum. This is perhaps more likely in the Anthoxanthum and Trisetum sub-communities where certain meadow species persist or where there are frag ments of meadow-sward on banks or adjacent verges. Similarly, the choking of drains may permit the development of extensive Holco-Juncetum. Generally, however, successions involving the Lolio- Cynosuretum appear to be mediated by grazing. Under grazing allows coarser species to increase their cover and this is sometimes a prelude to the invasion and spread of Arrhenatherum elatius and the development of an Arrhenatheretum. Abandoned pasture often shows a patchy mosaic of the two communities with scattered saplings of Crataegus monogyna. Where grazing is too severe, the sward may be opened up for invasion by weeds and rabbit infestation may speed the run-down to some weed-dominated vegetation. Trampling may be an attendant problem with over-grazing by cattle but is especially important in recreational and amenity stands of the Lolio-Cynosuretum where heavy use along foot paths, around gateways and in goal-mouths may produce a succession to Lolio-Plantaginion vegetation. Distribution "