"mg9","Zonation and succession The community occurs very frequently as part of zonations related to differences in soil moisture status. The Poa sub-community is common in moist hollows within https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press84 Mesotrophic grasslands pastures and on grazed verges where there is gleying and it commonly gives way, with a decrease in the cover of D. cespitosa, to Lolio-Cynosuretum or the Lolium-Alope- curus-Festuca community on better-drained soils. Around permanently wet hollows, pools and lakes, the community regularly forms part of an ecotone to some type of fen or swamp or, where there is a frequent rise and fall of water level, as around reservoirs, to a sequence of inundation communities. In many cases, it is possible to discern a range of intermediates between the Holcus-Deschampsia community and its neighbours and, in zonations to fen-meadows, there is, or has been in the past, the further complication of mowing and grazing effects. Such transitional swards may also figure in serai changes that ensue in badly-managed or abandoned pastures and meadows. Once established, D. cespitosa cannot be totally eradicated by continued grazing and, if drainage deteriorates, it will slowly spread to dominate in the Poa sub-community. Even where drainage is improved, preferential grazing of other species may prevent D. cespitosa being ousted by possible competitors. Where there is a reduction of grazing on better- drained land, the Arrhenatherum sub-community may develop from pasture swards. Although a switch to mowing is probably the best form of control of D. cespitosa (Davy 1980), the silting up of ditches within meadows may precipitate a spread of the community. If grazing continues, the Holcus-Deschampsia grassland is maintained as a plagioclimax and, even when it ceases, the densely-tussocky character of the vegetation often severely hinders any establishment of seedling shrubs and trees. Where succession to woodland does occur, it is usually to the Deschampsia sub-communities of the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia or Fraxinus-Acer- Mercurialis woodlands. Stands of the Holcus- Deschampsia grassland can often be found in rides and clearings in tracts of these kinds of woodlands or planted replacements of them in forests on heavy, clay soils with considerable continuity among the herb flora. In such situations, the Holcus-Deschampsia grassland can provide an important seed source for the spread of D. cespitosa beneath the trees when felling or coppicing increases the light. Distribution "