"ov21","Zonation and succession The Poa-Plantago community is very commonly found as part of zonations and mosaics with grasslands and other weed communities where the patterning is related to the degree of disturbance and trampling which the vegetation experiences. A usual situation is for the Poa-Plantago community to occupy the most trampled zone of vegetated ground along paths and in gateways, giving way to the Poly-gonum-Chamomilla community where treading and https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.090 Published online by Cambridge University Press396 Vegetation of open habitats disturbance are less severe. The Lolium sub-community represents an intermediate stage in such a zonation. The sequence may then continue to some kind of Lolium ley in enclosed pastures, to the Lolio-Plantaginetum in recre-ational swards of regularly mown verges or the Lolium-Dactylis community on infrequently mown or recently-neglected ground. The latter may pass in turn to the Arrhenathetum on verges which receive one or two annual cuts. More frequently trimmed verge margins may have the Poa-Taraxacum community. The Poa-Plan-tago community is also found as a more abrupt intrusion among calcicolous, calcifuge, dune and cliff-top grass-lands, wherever heavy trampling along paths and around viewpoints disrupts and transforms the existing swards. Wetter tracks, ill-drained or periodically-flooded pas-tures often have the Poly gonum-Ranunculus sub-com-munity in trampled and poached places, giving way to the Festuca-Agrostis-Potentilla grassland where treading and disturbance are less severe. This in turn can pass to the Lolio-Cynosuretum or a Lolium ley on better-drained ground. Successional developments from the Poa-Plantagograssland depend on the intensity of trampling. Wheretracks and gateways become disused, the community isprobably replaced by the Poly gonum-Chamomilla or Lolium-DactyUs community, or, where there is enrich-ment from dunging, by Urtica-Galium or Urtica-Cirsium vegetation. Increased flooding of watering places can lead to the appearance of Elymo-Rumicion vegetation like the Agrostis-Ranunculus community or Bidention assemblages such as the Polygono-Bidentetum or Poly-gonum-Poa community. Distribution "