"ov23","Zonation and succession The Lolium-Dactylis community is commonly found in zonations and mosaics with other grasslands and weed communities, on verges, recreation and waste ground, patterns being dependent upon the frequency of distur-bance, trampling and mowing. Paths through stretches of this vegetation usually see a sharp transition through the Plantago-Trifolium sub-community to the Poa-Plantago community along the trampled strip (Figure 25). Where there is more exten-sive trampling, an intervening zone of Polygonum-Chamomilla vegetation can mark the areas with lighter Figure 25. Vegetation pattern on an ill-maintained urban street. The sown and occasionally mown strips of turf on the pavement are Typical OV23a Lolium-Dactylis vegetation with an abundance of Hordeum murinum around the lamp-post indicating a favourite spot for dogs to urinate. More trampled sections of the verge have the OV23c Plantago-Trifolium sub-community, giving way to the OV21b Lolium sub-community of Poa-Plantago vegetation where there is heavier pedestrian pressure. Between the cobbles of the much-used snicket behind, there is Typical OV20a Sagino-Bryetum argentii and, along the crevices at the foot of the wall, the OV22c Crepis-Epilobium sub-community of Poa-Taraxacum vegetation. In crevices on the wall itself, small stands of OV41 Parietarietum judaicae can be seen, with a stand of OV24 Urtica-Galium vegetation in a run-down garden.treading. Verges with the Lolium-Dactylis community may have a disturbed fringe along the roadside with Poa-Matricaria vegetation. Where resown grasslands are less frequently mown or disturbed, Lolium-Dactylis vegetation can grade through the Arrhenatheretum-Medicago sub-community to the Arrhenatheretum and this can represent a common succes-sional development where management becomes less intensive. On verges or in recreation areas where this happens, the usual further stage is for Rubus-Holcus underscrub and Crataegus-Hedera scrub to develop. Similar mixtures of rank grasslands and woody vegetation can be found on wasteland and abandoned building sites where Lolium-Dactylis vegetation spreads on to spoil heaps. Distribution "