"ov26","Zonation and succession The Epilobium hirsutum community occurs in swamps, fens, woodlands and mesotrophic grasslands in zona-tions and mosaics that are determined by the position of the ground water table and the occurrence of grazing or mowing. A common sequence around open waters is for the community to occur behind some kind of tall-herb fen, like the Phragmites-Eupatorium fen or, in more generally eutrophic systems, the Phragmites-Urtica fen. With the latter, it can be difficult to draw the bounds between each community because patchy dominance of E. hirsutumand Urtica, along with Phragmites, is typical of the fen, and reed may run on with local prominence into the Epi-lobium vegetation. More abrupt sequences, where there is a sudden shift to wetter ground, as on steep ditch sides, can see the Epi-lobium community giving way directly to the Phragmite-tum, Glycerietum, Caricetum paniculatae, Caricetum ripariae, or Typhetum latifoliae swamps. Along streams where stock or people have access or on canal margins, such patterns may be very fragmentary because of tram-pling or bank erosion. Towards drier ground in these systems, the Epilobium community can give way to the Arrhenatheretum and these two vegetation types can also occur together on verges, the Filpendula-Angelica sub-community of the Epilobium vegetation being in common in ditches along roadsides. This sub-community is also widespread on river ter-races and in wet meadows where it often occurs with the Filipendula-Angelica mire, E. hirsutum persisting some distance into the fen as dominance shifts to the meadow-sweet. Where such systems are grazed and especially where the soils are not so free-draining, the Juncus-Cirsium community or Holco-Juncetum tends to replace the Filipendula-Angelica fen and, where the Epilobium vegetation persists, it is usually of the Juncus-Ranuncu-lus type. Woodlands of various kinds can be found as part of these sequences, particularly the Salix-Betula-Phrag-mites woodland and Alnus-Carex woodland in more intact fens and streamsides, the Alnus- Urtica woodland in eutrophicated fens and in mature river valleys with alluvial terraces. However, the shade sensitivity of E. hir-sutum means transitions to the Epilobium community are typically very abrupt. The community is probably expanding its cover in fens with increased eutrophication of ground waters and sed-iments and, once established, it is probably fairly stable:it is not really an element in active hydroseres. With con-tinued drying, however, it might be expected to progress eventually to some kind of Alnus- Urtica woodland. Distribution "