"ov27","Zonation and succession Very commonly, stands of E. angustifolium vegetation are sharply marked off from their surrounds by the highly localised disturbance that has resulted in their development. In oak-birch woodlands, for example, stands of the Rubus-Dryopteris sub-community often occupy much of small open areas created by clearance of fire, or those places where burning of brashings or coppice waste has been concentrated, surrounded by surviving areas of https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.096 Published online by Cambridge University PressOV27 Epilobium angustifolium community 421 Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus, Quercus-Betula-Oxalis, or Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodlands or coniferised replacements. Sometimes, Rubus-Pteridium or Rubus-Holcus underscrubs also occur with the willow-herb where bramble or bracken have gained ascendancy or else patches of Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland on parched or grazed areas. Heathy woodlands where burning has occurred sometimes have both the Rubus-Dryopteris and the Holcus-Festuca sub-communities. On unwooded heaths, the latter type of E. angustifolium vegetation usually marks out old burns among Calluna-Festuca, Calluna-Ulex minor, Calluna-Ulex gallii and Calluna-Erica cinerea heaths. Ulex-Rubus scrub can also develop around disturbed and burned areas and, on grazed heaths, Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex and Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grasslands can also form part of the patchwork. The Acer-Sambucus sub-community is also commonly seen in woodlands, in this case the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis or Fagus-Mercurialis types, marking out old bonfire sites. In larger clearings where trees andshrubs are slower to re-establish themselves, Deschamp-sia-Holcus grassland is a common associate, with Crataegus-Hedera scrub where shrub colonisation is occurring. The Urtica-Cirsium sub-community is often seen among disturbed or burned stretches of Arrhenathere-tum or Deschampsia-Holcus grassland, often with stands of Urtica-Galium and Urtica-Cirsium vegetation. The Ammophila sub-community occurs locally among Ammophila-Festuca, Festuca-Galium and Ammophila-Arrhenatherum grasslands where dunes have been burned and disturbed. Sometimes, Hippophae scrub also occurs in such situations. E. angustifolium is a formidable competitor to smaller herbs and seedling trees and shrubs but woody plants can eventually overtop the willow-herb where they have established in more open places or where they resprout from substantial cut stools. The particular kind of woodland succeeding the E. angustifolium vegetation will depend on the local soil and climatic conditions and the availability of colonisers, but the range of commu-nities noted above may all eventually replace stands ofwillow-herb according to particular circumstances. On more mesotrophic or calcareous soils, Crataegus-Hedera or Prunus scrub may supervene. On sandy soils, resump-tion of judicious burning or grazing may reinstate some kind of heath rather than acidophilous oak-birch wood-land. Distribution "