"ov37","Zonation and succession The usual context of the Minuartio-Thlaspietum is among grasslands and heaths, any transitions to whichare mediated by differences in soils. In fact, quite often, stands of the community are rather sharply marked off from the grasslands around. At lower altitudes, in the Mendips and Derbyshire, these grasslands are usually of the Festuca-Avenula type, most often the Dicranum sub-community or, where there has been some improvement for agriculture, the Holcus-Tri-folium sub-community. Where soils change more gradu-ally, Typical Minuartio-Thlaspietum may give way to the Mesobromion pastures through the Achillea-Euphrasia sub-community. In other places, the latter vegetation passes to a Cynosurion sward, usually the Lolio-Cyno-sure turn, derived by fertilising and often ploughing and reseeding. Where soils are somewhat less calcareous, as where superficial overlie the limestone, the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland can figure among the pas-tures around the lead-mine spoil or, where grazing has not been so heavy, heath vegetation. In the Mendips,where this situation is more common, this is generally Calluna- Ulex gallii heath. At higher altitudes over most of the Yorkshire Dales, the calcicolous pasture is of the Sesleria-Galium type. The Typical sub-community of this grassland can pass sharply to Typical Minuartio-Thlaspietum or the Clado-nia sub-community or, more gradually, through the Achillea-Euphrasia sub-community. Elsewhere, on somewhat more acidic soils, the Sesleria-Galium grass-land can be replaced by the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland or, where grazing has not been so intensive, by grassy forms of Calluna- Vaccinium heath. Where succession has proceeded further around old lead mines, the Minuartio-Thlaspietum may be closely hemmed in by Crataegus-Hedera scrub and Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland at lower altitudes or by https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.106 Published online by Cambridge University Press448 Vegetation of open habitats Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis on higher ground to the north. The character of the soils supporting the Minuar-tio-Thlaspietum itself is generally inimical to colonisa-tion by shrubs and trees, but relief from grazing may have some effect on the vegetation in the long term. Distribution "