"ov38","Zonation and succession The Gymno carpietum typically occurs among patch-works of grassland, scrub and woodland on colonising screes and rocky limestone slopes. This vegetation often appears to be a colonising com-munity on coarser limestone talus and, where grazing is absent, it can be overtaken by invasion of woody plants. Typically, over the warmer and drier limestones of south-ern England and Wales, the kind of woodland which develops in such situations is the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercuri-alis woodland. The eventual dominants of this commu-nity can include Fraxinus, Ulmus glabra, Acer pseudoplatanus, A. campestre and Quercus robus with often a rich understorey of shrubs among which Corylus avellana and Crataegus monogyna figure prominently. However, early stages in the development of this kind of woodland, and of the Crataegus-Hedera scrub which often precedes it, are quite diverse and strongly depen-dent on which seed-parents are available locally and also on the particular terrain conditions (Merton 1970). Various forms of this scrub and woodland can therefore be found in close association with the Gymno car pietum, species like Geranium robertianum, Mercurialis perennis, Mycelis muralis and Viola riviniana running on with undiminished frequency and often in some abundance under the shrubs and trees. With increasing shade,however, the two dominants of the fern community are quickly overwhelmed by the closing canopy. The various elements in this kind of pattern survive best on sunnier slopes with coarser talus and rocky outcrops where woodland development is more patchy. In some such situations, the fern community grows among the distinc-tive Teucrium sub-community of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland (cf. Oberdorfer 1977). Where talus becomes finer and surrounding slopes sustain calcicolous pasture to which stock have access, the sward is typically of the Festuca-Avenula type but this is characteristically sharply marked off from the fern stands on the coarser scree. One further element in the mosaics can be provided by the Asplenietum which replaces the Gymno car pietum on limestone exposures with smaller crevices. A variety of bryophytes occur in both assemblages. In the Yorkshire Dales, where the climate is somewhat cooler and moister away from sunny south-facing slopes, the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland is replaced in such sequences by the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland and the Festuca-Avenula grassland by the Ses-leria-Galium grassland. In many of its localities, the Gymno car pietum should probably be seen as a secondary colonising community following woodland clearance. Where it becomes sur-rounded by subsequent regrowth of scrub or where thetalus is especially coarse, this vegetation may benefit from the protection from grazing and persist for some time. Distribution "