"ov39","Zonation and succession In its natural habitats, the Asplenietum is found on rocky habitats among other fern and bryophyte communities, calcicolous grasslands, scrub and woodland where zona-tions and successions are related to the extent of soil development, the degree of exposure to light and wind and the intensity of grazing. Stands in artificial habitatsare often more isolated but can sometimes be found with other fern, bryophyte or crevice vegetation depending on the amount of shelter and shade. Many of the floristic and structural differences https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.108 Published online by Cambridge University PressOV39 Asplenietum trichomano-rutae-murariae community 455 between the two sub-communities of the Asplenietum are related to the extent of soil formation and colonisa-tion by vascular plants over limestone outcrops. Quite often, the Sedum-Arenaria sub-community is transi-tional between the Trichostomum- Tortula sub-commu-nity and some kind of calcicolous grassland on less rocky slopes around. There, more extensive, deeper and somewhat less drought-prone soils are often also access-ible to grazing stock which cannot reach the craggier ground. Over much of the range of this fern vegetation in southern Britain, the typical calcicolous pasture swards are the Festuca-Avenula grassland and, in the warmer south and east, its analogues dominated by Bromus erectus and Brachypodium pinnatum. In fact, where the harder Carboniferous and Devonian lime-stones that provide some of the most congenial sub-strates for this community crop out, it is usually the Dicranum sub-community of Festuca-Avenula grassland that forms the bulk of the pasture on rendziniform soils of gentler slopes. In the Mendips, Derbyshire Dales and in north and south Wales, transitions to such grasslandinvolve a rapid loss of the fern and much of the bryo-phyte contingent and a rise in the extent and number ofperennial vascular calcicoles in the vegetation. Someephemerals may continue to find a place on scuffed areas of sward but in general most are scarce. On the Carbo-niferous Limestone around Morecambe Bay and in the Yorkshire Dales, the Sesleria-Galium grassland replaces the Festuca-Avenula grassland in such sequences while on local limestone exposures through Scotland, the community can be found among stands of Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland. On the Durness Limestone of Skye, this Asplenietum occurs in crevices in close asso-ciation with the Dryas-Carex heath. More locally, the Asplenietum can be found in associa-tion with the Festuca-Carlina grassland on limestone cliffs around the south-western seaboard of Britain but in the very hot and sunny conditions characteristic of such situations in summer, the fern vegetation often extends only on to somewhat shaded rock surfacesnearby. In more inland habitats, where the surrounds to rock outcrops are not grazed, the Asplenietum may be moreisolated among scrub and woodland. Usually, on thelimestones characteristic of this fern vegetation, this is Crataegus-Hedera scrub or Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland. Most of the shrubs and trees of these com-munities show limited ability to colonise rockier ground where soils are very limited so they peter out around the crags in a more open cover of stunted individuals. However, they may cast some shade on the Asplenietum which can be inimical to its survival. Where rocky crags occur close to gardens, colonisation of the crevices themselves with Cotoneaster and Berber is spp. can be extensive and this can shade out the community com-pletely. Where deeper crevices in limestone outcrops get more shade and shelter, the Asplenietum can give way to the Asplenio-Cystopteridetum or, in grikes, to fragmentary stands of minituarised woodland. On walls and build-ings where mortar-filled vegetation crevices provide thehabitat for this the Trichostomum-Tor tula sub-commu-nity can be found in close association with the Parieta-rietum and Cymbalarietum communities. Distribution "