"s12","Zonation and succession In open-water transitions around larger water bodies, the community may form the distal limit of emergent zonations, although its occurrence is often patchy (e.g. Meres Report 1980). In less eutrophic waters and/or where the substrate is more organic, there may be a transition through the Carex rostrata sub-community to the Caricetum rostratae in deeper water. Towards drier ground, the Typhetum may give way, sometimes through the Mentha sub-community, to fairly rich fenvegetation such as that of the Phragmites-Eupatorium community or the Caricetum paniculatae and this may in turn pass to carr woodland. Often, however, the community is part of more trun cated zonations, especially in smaller ponds and dykes, and here, too, the vegetation is sometimes influenced by eutrophication from agricultural or industrial run-off. Dense stands of the Typha sub-community often choke such water bodies, passing on the banks to Phragmites- Urtica fen or tail-herb vegetation such as the Phalaride- tum arundinaceae or the Epilobietum hirsutae (Figure 14). On the margins of sluggish streams, canals and wider dykes, patches of the Typha sub-community may occur in deeper water and give way, through the Alisma sub community, to the Sparganietum erecti\ in other cases, fragments of the Alisma sub-community and the Sparganietum may occur side by side in the shallows. Above,Figure 14. Typical pattern of aquatic, swamp and fen vegetation around silting lowland pools in West Yorkshire. S28 Phalaridetum tail-herb fen S14 Sparganietum swampI . A20 Ranunculetum peltatiWE27 Epilobium hirsutum weed community S12 Typhetum latifoliae swamp S23 Glycerio- Sparganion water-margin Bare silt Open water https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.042 Published online by Cambridge University PressS12 Typhetum latifoliae swamp 181 there may be a zone of the Glycerietum maximae or an abrupt transition to tail-herb vegetation. On the salt-marshes at Bridgwater and Berrow in Somerset, the Typha sub-community occurs in association with the Scirpetum maritimi. Although the association between the Typhetum and sites with active silt accretion is commonplace, there is very little systematic information available about its role in succession. At North Fen, Esthwaite, in Cumbria, the community has spread over 70 years from its confines on the rapidly accumulating material around the mouth of the Black Beck to form a belt between the Phragmitetum australis swamp and the Potentillo-Caricetum (Pearsall 1918, Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wilson 1978).Distribution "