"s13","Zonation and succession Stands of the community, sometimes patchy or forming but a narrow belt, may abut directly on to open water or be fronted by a narrow zone of the Scirpetum lacustris. In small ponds and along dyke margins, the Typhetum may give way in shallower water to the Sparganietum erecti but in larger and gradual open-water transitions the community may be part of more extensive zonations passing landwards to other types of swamp such as the Phragmitetum australis, the Caricetum paniculatae or the Cladietum marisci which may, in turn, grade to rich https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.043 Published online by Cambridge University Press186 Swamps and tail-herb fens fen vegetation of the Peucedano-Phragmitetum (e.g. Lambert & Jennings 1951, Lambert 1951, Sinker 1962, Wheeler 1978, 1980 a). Around the Bure broads in Norfolk, detailed stratigraphical evidence has been adduced to show that such zonations represent a variety of successional sequences which share an identical early stage in which the Typhetum angustifoliae plays a major role in the colonisation of open water (Lambert & Jennings 1951, Lambert 1951). In this area, P. australis was the usual coloniser of the Typhetum, building up a fairly stable semi-floating raft into which the cypera- ceous dominants then invaded. At Sweat Mere in Shropshire, C. paniculata seems to colonise the Typhetum directly (Sinker 1962). It is clear, however, that, in some areas, the extent of the Typhetum and presumably therefore its status in successions have been modified since the earlier accounts. First, the aquatic element so prominent in past descriptions of the community and of the fronting Scirpetum has been much depleted by disturbance and eutrophication. Second, loss of Typhetum itself has been an important component in the general decline of swamp reported from Broadland in recent years (e.g. Boorman & Fuller 1981). Typha spp. are eaten by larger wildfowl (Ogilvie 1978) although P. australis seems to be preferred against T. angustifolia by greylag and preferential grazing of mixed or contiguous stands may, indeed, give the latter a temporary advantage (Fiala & Kvet 1971, Boorman & Fuller 1981). T. angustifolia is, however, avidly eaten by coypu which will dig up the roots and rhizomes, a rich source of carbohydrate in winter, and which seem to prefer it to P. australis (Gosling 1974). Anon (1978) considered T. angustifolia to have been particularly badly hit by coypu and, in their confirmation of the importance of this animal in the general Broadland swamp decline, Boorman & Fuller (1981) showed how, at some sites, the marginal fringe had been pushed back with the virtual elimination of the Scirpetum and Typhetum zone to leave P. australis as the coloniser in shallower water. Distribution "