"s14","Zonation and succession Extensive stands of the community are rare, although the Sparganium sub-community sometimes chokes the centre of small ponds and narrow channels. More often, one or more of the sub-communities occurs in a belt with aquatic communities, other swamps and tail-herb vege tation in zonations related to water depth and water movement in open-water transitions and as riparian sequences. In the standing waters of ponds and dykes, bands of the Sparganium or Alisma sub-communities often give way in deeper water to Potamogeton natans and duckweeds (e.g. Walker 1905). On gently shelving margins with silty substrates, the Sparganietum may form a mosaic with the Eleocharis sub-community of the Eleocharitetum palustris or grade to it in shallower water. Limits of inundation in fluctuating waters are sometimes marked by a fairly abrupt change to the Phalaridetum arundinaceae, and the Phalaris sub community may form a narrow transition. Where graz ing stock have access and the substrate becomes poached (a common occurrence around streams and farm ponds), a fretted zone of the Sparganietum may give way to a patchy Glycerietumfluitantis or the Agrostis stolonifera-Alopecurus geniculatus community. Where there is a switch to clayey ground-water gleys on pond margins, there can be a transition through the Mentha sub-community of the Sparganietum to Holco- Juncion rush-pastures. Along streams and rivers, the movement of water and the generally more steeply shelving banks often rise to rather different zonations which may be much frag mented or conflated. A common pattern is for a zone of the Alisma sub-community to pass in deeper water to the Sparganium sub-communities of the Typhetum latifoliae or Scirpetum lacustris and to give way in the shallows to the Alisma-Sparganium sub-community of the Glycerietum maximae (e.g. Haslam 1978). On the lower reaches of permanent chalk streams, where clay begins to constitute a considerable proportion of the substrate, the Sparganietum may occur in similar sequences in a patchy mosaic with the Caricetum acutiformis and, along peat dykes, the community sometimes fronts a zone of the Phragmitetum australis (e.g. Haslam 1978). In many cases, however, the Sparganietum occurs in patchy mosaics along stream and dyke sides with scat tered clumps of the above communities or with the Caricetum otrubae or Carex pseudocyperus swamp. Although S. erectum is capable of considerable small rhizome extension and spread of the community may aid the colonisation of small open water bodies, the species does not seem to be able to compete with the more robust P. australis and Typha spp. (Cook 1961 ). In running waters any advance of the community is often repeatedly set back by erosion of the banks. Distribution "