"s2","Zonation and succession The centres of small basin mires and peat cuttings may be completely filled by dense stands of the community. In other cases, the Cladietum survives patchily in pools and stagnant dykes within largely terrestrialised mire complexes, giving way to a variety of fen or poor-fen communities. In grossly disturbed and abandoned sites, the community may occur in juxtaposition with the Phragmites australis-Urtica dioica fen. In larger hollows, the Cladietum may give way directly to open standing water or, around ‘pulk-holes ’, it may abut on to bare silt (Lambert 1951). In some sites, there is a swamp mosaic of the community with the Caricetum elatae, apparently in relation to the height and shortterm variability of the water-table (Haslam 1965). Around more extensive open-water transitions, the Cla dietum may occur patchily in the shallower waters in association with Phragmites swamps and, especially to the north and west, the Caricetum rostratae (Holdgate 19556). Exceptionally the community may be found as https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.032 Published online by Cambridge University PressS2 Cladietum marisci sedge-swamp 133 part of more intact zonations as at Upton Broad in Norfolk. Here, Lambert & Jennings (1951) described sequences running from the Typhetum angustifoliae and/or Phragmitetum australis through the Cladietum to carr woodland on the thicker, drier peats away from the open broad. From the more fragmentary pattern of vegetation in the flood-plain mire remnants at Wicken Fen, Godwin & Bharucha (1932) had shown how the distribution of Phragmites swamp, the Cladietum and carr in such transitions could be related to differences in the height of the water-table, and particularly to the extent of water excess in winter. This they saw as representing a primary succession involving the colonisation of open water by Phragmites, still remaining as a swamp along lodes and around pools, the invasion of the Phragmites swamp by Cladium, best seen in the old peat cuttings, and the gradual colonisation of the ‘Pure Sedge ’ by bushes. Stratigraphical analysis of the Broadland deposits under the zonations described by Lambert & Jennings (1951) revealed a similar picture, except that there, a second phase of Phragmites dominance seemed to be interposed between the Cladietum and the carr (Lambert 1951). Despite this, and the rarity with which Lambert (1951) observed direct bush invasion of dense uncut Cladietum around the Bure broads, the advance of woody species into the community at Wicken has been plotted in some detail (Godwin & Tansley 1929, Godwin & Bharucha 1932). Here, the most frequent invaders were Frangula alnus, then Rhamnus catharticus, Salix cinerea and Viburnum opulus, with very small amounts of Crataegus monogyna and Betula pendula. These gained a hold in the Cladietum towards its uppermost boundary, the seedlings surviving down to a critical limit of bush growth where the peat surface experienced shallow winter flooding of several weeks ’ duration (Godwin & Bharucha 1932, Godwin 1943/?). Initial patchy bush colonisation over a period of 20 years or so was followed by gradual infill of the canopy and eventual extinction of the dense Cladium cover (Godwin & Tansley 1929, Godwin 1936). The long survival of the sedge was perhaps due to its evergreen nature (Conway 1942). Studies at Wicken also revealed how repeated sum mer cutting of the Cladietum ‘Pure Sedge ’ might deflect the primary succession to produce ‘Mixed Sedge ’ and ‘Litter ’ (Godwin 1929, 1941; Godwin & Tansley 1929), vegetation represented in this scheme by various kinds of Cirsio-Molinie tum, described among the mires of Volume 2. Distribution "