"s24","Zonation and succession In Broadland, the Peucedano-Phragmitetum generally occupies the middle zone of the flood-plain mires between the open water of the rivers and broads and the valley sides. In some places, it forms part of a complete and fairly clear sequence from swamp through fen to scrub and woodland, including vegetation developed over both the colonised margins of the deep peat cuts of the broads and the intact alluvial deposits behind. Such zonations have, however, been much confused, especially on these drier solid substrates towards their landward limit, by the various traditional mowing treatments and shallow peat digging, and are now further complicated by neglect and the spread of woody vege tation over the abandoned fen compartments and dykes. Towards the open water, the transitions have been truncated somewhat by coypu activity and affected by eutrophication. The whole area occupied by these com munities has, moreover, been reduced and fragmented by the progressive reclamation of the flood-plain mires for intensive farming. The Peucedano-Phragmitetum therefore survives here as part of sometimes extensive but often isolated tracts of complex vegetation over a largely decayed agricultural landscape now subject to the renewed but modified influence of a flood-plain mire environment. Those few areas of the community which exist outside Broadland occur in smaller and even more isolated and modified fragments of vegetation, far removed from the natural seasonal fluctuations of large bodies of open water and generally sharply marked off from the sur rounding land which has been intensively drained, widely cut over for peat and which now carries improved grassland or arable on its shrunken and wasted surface. Here, extensive zonations are rare, swamp vegetation being largely confined to fragmentary strips in the remaining open dykes and the compartments having complex patterns of fen and woody vegetation much influenced by treatment and neglect. The natural disposition of the community between swamp on the one hand and scrub and woodland on the other is most clearly related to the water-table and, in some places in Broadland, it is possible to proceed sequentially through the various vegetation types in moving from broad margin to valley side over gently sloping ground that, in summer, is dry to increasingly greater depths and, in winter, is subject to increasingly shorter periods of inundation. Some of the classic profiles provided by Lambert & Jennings (1951) from the Bure valley show this well. The Peucedano-Phragmitetum generally occupies the zone where the substrate is sufficiently dry for the overwhelming dominance of swamp helophytes to be challenged by its characteristic suite of fen species but yet sufficiently wet to prevent the permanent establishment of shrubs and trees. The extent of this zone and the sharpness of its boundaries with swamp and woodland vary according to the pattern of interaction between the fluctuating water and the topography of the flood-plain deposits, but they are also influenced by the different tolerances which species have to isolation from the open waters and their irrigating effect. Gradual switches in dominance often blur the junction between swamp and fen and also produce some natural internal heterogeneity with the sub-commtfnities of the Peucedano- https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.054 Published online by Cambridge University Press230 Swamps and tail-herb fens Phragmitetum, as can be seen in the relationships between G. maxima and Phragmites in the Glyceria sub community and Phragmites and Cladium in the Typical sub-community, and the generally increased prominence of Juncus subnodulosus and Calamagrostis canescens further away from open water (see Habitat above). The upper boundary between the community and scrub and woodland is also made rather hazy by the varieties of shade tolerance which Peucedano-Phragmitetum spe cies have. Some of the important components of the community, e.g. Carex paniculata, C. acutiformis, C. vesicaria, Calamagrostis canescens and Thelypteris palustris, can persist under a shrub or tree cover producing a diffuse zone of overlap between fen and field layer that does not correspond exactly with the limit of the canopy. The particular sub-communities of the Peucedano- Phragmitetum involved in this basic zonation seem to depend partly on the trophic state of the waters and substrate which may itself be a function of the distance from freely circulating open waters. Along the Yare, with its marked tidally influenced water movement, the usual pattern is for the Glyceria sub-community to occur behind a front of the Glycerietum maximae swamp, although, with the neglect of the open dyke system along this river, the general prominence of G. maxima itself and the gradual nature of the transitions between extensive areas of swamp and primary fen so characteristic of Lambert ’s (1946) descriptions are much less obvious. In less eutrophic conditions without any pronounced diurnal fluctuation in water-level, the community can be fronted by bands of the Scirpetum lacustris, the Typhetum angustifoliae and the Phragmitetum australis in progressively shallower water, although this sequence has been much fretted by coypu activity (compare the descriptions of Pallis 1911, Lambert 1951 and Boorman & Fuller 1981 ). In some places, there is then a zone of the Caricetum paniculatae which passes to the Carexpaniculata sub-community of the Peucedano-Phragmitetum or, in a few localities, to fragments of the Cicuta sub community. More often, however, the Phragmitetum gives way directly to the Typical sub-community. In the most oligotrophic conditions, the Cladietum marisci may be the sole swamp community fronting Typical Peucedano-Phragmitetum (Lambert & Jennings 1951, Lambert 1951, Wheeler 1980c). In the most natural of these kinds of sequences, the community gives way, with varying degrees of abruptness to woodland with Alnus glutinosa, Salix cinerea and Betula pubescens (Figure 15). Much of the stratigraphical and observational evi dence which has been used to interpret such zonations as the spatial expression of a primary hydrosere has originated from Broadland (e.g. Lambert 1946, 1948, 1951; Lambert & Jennings 1951; Walker 1970; Wheeler 1980c). Here, the Peucedano-Phragmitetum includes all the primary fen which develops with the gradual autochthonous accumulation of organic matter over the lake muds around the broad margins, first above the lowest limit of permanent standing water, then up towards the highest bounds ever reached on the flood, with a pro gressive lowering of the water-table and a reduction in the deposition of any allochthonous sediments. The present distribution of the various kinds of primary Peucedano-Phragmitetum in relation to the nutrient conditions of the environment suggests that these may in some way control the particular direction which the succession takes through the community (Lambert 1946, 1951; Wheeler 1980a, c, 1983; Wheeler & Giller 1982a). Lambert (1946, 1951) characterised four "major pathways of succession and later observations tend to bear out their early stages except that, at the present time, Carex acutiformis seems to have a less distinctive role than she suggested. This species is not a very good diagnostic taxon for any sub-community and, in Lambert ’s own studies, it was shown to be strongly influenced by mowing (Lambert 1946, 1948) and also to be more characteristic in some places of subsequent woodland than of preceeding fen (Lambert 1951). In great measure, the direction of the succession seems to be already set by the swamp stage. Although the distinctive fen associates of the Peucedano-Phragmitetum show some sorting according to the nutrient status of the waters and substrate, the swamp helophytes continue to exert some influence on the vegetation, especially on its physiognomy, and they contribute to some extent, to the particular floristic character of those sub-communities which occur as primary fen. Their growth form may also influence the speed with which the succession passes, not only from the swamps to the Peucedano-Phragmitetum, but also from fen to scrub and woodland. Although the absolute limit of shrub and tree invasion is probably controlled by the water-table, and especially perhaps by its maximum winter level (e.g. Godwin & Bharucha 1932, Godwin 1936), this will itself be influenced by the rate of accumulation of litter and the extent to which seedlings can gain a hold will also be affected by the density of both living and dead material on the ground. Along the Yare, for example, Lambert (1946) noted that scrub development did not generally begin in primary fen of the Glyceria sub-community until after the invasion of Phragmites when the blanketing effect of the luxuriant and lodged shoots of G. maxima was broken up; then abundant Salix cinerea appeared, followed by Alnus glutinosa. A dense cover of Cladium in Typical Peucedano-Phragmitetum may be similarly inimical to seedling establishment (Lambert 1951), although at Wicken it has been shown that some woody species can invade virtually pure Cladietum marisci directly (Godwin & Tansley 1929, Godwin & https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.054 Published online by Cambridge University PressS24 Peucedano-Phragmitetum australis fen 231 Bharucha 1932, Godwin 1943£>). The Carex paniculata sub-community, on the other hand, is especially prone to early invasion, with abundant seedlings of both S. cinerea and A. glutinosa quickly growing up on the tussock tops and forming a canopy (Lambert 1951). The dominants of primary Peucedano-Phragmitetum also exert some influence on the floristics and physiognomy of the eventual woodland cover. The distinctions which Lambert (1951,1965) made between ‘swamp carr ’ and ‘semi-swamp carr ’ seem to be largely structural and most of the /l/Hi/s-dominated woodland in which Carex paniculata and/or C. acutiformis are prominent can be incorporated within the single community of Alnus glutinosa-Carex paniculata woodland. The Alnus gluti- nosa-Filipendula ulmaria sub-community of the Salix cinerea-Betula pubescens-Phragmites australis is rather similar in its canopy composition but seems to correspond to the ‘fen carr ’ of Lambert (1951,1965), which she saw as the natural development from the kinds of Peucedano-Phragmitetum in which either Phragmites or Cladium had been dominant. It is difficult to assess the absolute rate of these kinds of primary succession but Lambert & Jennings (1951) noted that, along the Bure at least, the limits of the open Broads waters shown on the 1838-41 Tithe Maps coin-Figure 15. Variations among sequences of swamp, tail-herb fen and woodland vegetation in open-water transition mires around lowland standing and sluggish waters. cided roughly with the original limits of lake muds in the deep medieval peat cuttings. This would suggest that, whether the Broads remained open prior to this time for natural reasons or not, most of the visible colonisation from swamp through, in places, to woodland, has occurred within the last 150 years. Stratigraphical analysis of the solid peats and clays nearer the valley sides (Jennings & Lambert 1951, Lambert & Jennings 1951) has revealed a picture of a simpler and more gradual succession following the final marine transgression. Here, vegetation dominated by Phragmites seems to have given way directly to ‘fen carr’, some of which was thought to have a possibly direct continuity with the original woodland cover (Lambert & Jennings 1951). Over much of the extent of these firmer deposits, however, the long history of interference means that much of the woodland cover is probably of secondary origin. It is very difficult to extract from the diverse relationships between fen treatment and the vegetation, any coherent schemes of secondary succession attendant upon continued treatment or, now, its almost total demise. Nevertheless, a number of tentative observations can be made. First, on the drier peats at Wicken, Godwin (1941) demonstrated a reversible relationship between sedge- dominated vegetation very similar to the Symphytum sub-community and a Molinia caerulea-dommated grassy sward based on the frequency of summer cut tings, the latter vegetation being favoured by annual cropping for litter. Comparable vegetation was also S8 Scirpetum lacustris swamp S13 Typhetum angustifoliae swamp SWAMPS4 Phragmitetum australis swampS3 Caricetum paniculatae swampS5 Glycerietum maximae swampS4 Phragmitetum australis swampS2 Cladietum marisci swamp TALL- HERB FENS26 Phragmites- Urtica fen a Filipendula sub communityS25 Phragmites-Eupatorium tail-herb fen a Phragmites b Carex sub-sub community communityS24 Peucedano-Phragmitetum tail-herb fen a Carex b Glyceria b Typical sub-sub-sub community community community WOODLANDW6 Alnus- Urtica woodlandW2 Salix-Betula-Phragmites Woodland https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.054 Published online by Cambridge University Press232 Swamps and tail-herb fens shown by Lambert (1946) to be characteristic of areas along the Yare, subject to similar treatment and far from the irrigating effect of the waters. Such sustained sum mer mowing, especially on drier peats, seems to be one of the most effective ways of breaking the cycle of maintenance of secondary fen by converting the Peucedano-Phragmitetum to another vegetation type. Systematic grazing by stock, especially when combined with embankment and drainage, is probably another. On the grazed levels of the Yare, the community appears to develop into the Holco-Juncetum under such treatment (Lambert 1948). More drastic disturbance of drier peats may result in oxidation of the organic deposits and a release of nutrients (e.g. Haslam 1965) with an increase in nitrophilous species. Such a development is perhaps already seen within the Glyceria and Symphytum sub communities but it may also transform the Peucedano- Phragmitetum into the tail-herb fens of the Phragmites- Urtica community or the Epilobietum hirsutae. Second, how far such disruptions as these prevent the eventual re-establishment, with neglect, of the kinds of woodland that result from the primary succession is unknown. At Wicken, there seems to have been an opportunistic recolonisation of abandoned sedge-beds with the establishment of a cover largely of Rhamnus catharticus and Frangula alnus (Godwin 1936, Godwin et al. 1974), although A. glutinosa is regenerating in places. In the Yare fens, Lambert (1946) suggested that secondary Alnus woodland, though readily developing from litter-mown areas, was deficient in Carex paniculata as compared with primary carr. It is possible that more disturbed tail-herb fens regress to Alnus glutinosa- Urtica dioica woodland. In some places, the re-development of woodland is complicated by the possibility of surface acidification of undisturbed peats which are now above the water-table. In Broadland, the Schoenus sub-community is asso ciated with uncut baulks and, with a cessation of mowing, this vegetation is rapidly invaded by Myrica gale, first to form the Myrica sub-community of the Peucedano-Phragmitetum and then a Myrica scrub. This, in turn, may progress to the Betula-Molinia woodland (Wheeler 1980c). The recent marked expansion of B. pubescens on the drier peats at Wicken (Godwin et al. 1974) seems to be related to surface acidification. Indeed, it is not impossible that here and in some parts of Broadland there survive, as at Woodwalton (Poore 1956/?), fragments of a pre-existing cover of acid peat that has been systematically stripped off (Wheeler 1978). Third, the flooding of shallow peat cuttings, such as those dug quite extensively in some Broadland valleys in the mid-nineteenth century, seems to have created rather specialised conditions for the development of a somewhat different hydrosere to any of those characteristic of the broads margins themselves. Here, swamp vegetation may include stands of that distinct form of the Galium palustre sub-community of the Phragmitetum which Wheeler (1980«) termed Cicuto-Phragmitetum developed over a floating raft of Typha angustifolia remains (see also Lambert 1951). Other such flooded workings are at present occupied by rafts of the Carex lasiocarpa variant of the Cicuta sub-community of the Peucedano-Phragmitetum and it is possible that the two are serally related (Wheeler 1980c). Within areas con taining stands of either or both of these vegetation types there are sometimes small islands of the Sphagnum sub community of the Salix cinerea-Betula pubescens- Phragmites australis woodland often picked out by the prominence of the bright green fronds of Dryopteris cristata around the margins (Wheeler 1978). At least some of these seem to represent the development of ombrotrophic nuclei on floating rafts of peat which are kept out of reach of flooding with the calcareous and nutrient-rich broads waters (Wheeler 1978, 1980c, 1983; Giller 1982). Although such mires seem to have formed within the nearby Fens (e.g. Godwin & Clifford 1938, Poore 1956/?; see also Godwin & Turner 1933, Walker 1970), their formation in Broadland at the present time seems to be strongly associated with artificial habitats. Even the large island at the north end of Barton Broad, which has a particularly extensive stand of this kind of woodland (Wheeler 1978), is known to have been piled around the edge and infilled with slushy dredgings (Lambert & Jennings 1965). The vegetation of these shallow peat diggings is often further complicated by their isolation from the main paths of water movement through the broads and dykes and by the possible lateral seepage of water at the junctions of the flood-plain mire with the valley sides. It is in such positions that the Cicuta sub-community can occur in striking mosaics with a carpet of the Carex rostrata-Calliergon fen. These mosaics, which Wheeler (1978, 1980«) included within the Peucedano-Phragmitetum as the sub-community caricetosum but which are fully described in this scheme under the Car ex-Calliergon fen, are the locus of a number of Broadland rarities, including Liparis loeselii, Anagallis tenella, Drosera ang lica, Parnassia palustris and Hypericum elodes. The detailed environmental relationships of this kind of vegetation and its possible role in any fen succession are unknown. Distribution "