"s25","Zonation and succession The Phragmites-Eupatorium fen occurs typically in small, often linear, stands in complexes of herbaceous and woody vegetation on mires which are now often sharply marked off from surrounding agricultural land. In more intact valley mires, the Phragmites and Carex paniculata sub-communities may form a zone along the river terraces, sometimes grading in open water to Phragmitetum australis swamp. On drier ground there may be a transition to the Salix cinerea-Betula pubes- cens-Phragmites australis woodland or Alnus glutinosa- Carexpaniculata woodland. This probably represents a fairly natural succession on alluvial deposits in these calcareous and fairly eutrophic valley mires and Haslam (1965) adduced some documentary evidence that S. cinerea carr had succeeded P/zragmzZes-dominated vege tation in 50 years in a Breckland site. Frequently, however, such successions have been disturbed and zonations are more complex (Figure 16). Peat digging and mowing for litter are known to have occurred in some valley mires and the abandonment of these prac tices, together with subsequent interference such as periodic burning, channel dredging, the construction of embankments and the drainage of surrounding land, is often marked now by a patchwork of the Phragmites- Eupatorium fen with more eutrophic communities such as the tail-herb vegetation of the Phragmites-Urtica fen and the Epilobietum hirsutae (e.g. Haslam 1965, Rat cliffe & Hattey 1982) and the Alnus glutinosa-Urtica dioica woodland over the dry and disturbed alluvium. In some valley mires, there is a natural marginal transition from the community to the Schoeno-Juncetum along a spring-line (Haslam 1965, Wheeler 1980c). Often, though, the accessible edges of valley mires have been open to stock and grazing has obscured any zonations. In such situations, well described from the East Kent fens (Rose 1950) and the Gordano Valley in Somerset (Willis & Jefferies 1959), the Phragmites- Eupatorium fen may survive only around the wetter streams and dykes in a landscape of fen-meadow. Similar patterns can be seen on some disturbed spring mires, such as those described from the Little Ouse-Waveney watershed on the Norfolk-Suffolk border (Bellamy & Rose 1961, Haslam 1965). In more eutrophic calcareous topogenous mires, the community can occur as a zone between swamps and woodland, although here, too, patterns may be confused by disturbance and truncated above by sharp transitions to agricultural land. Some open-water transitions and flood-plain mires have a belt of the Phragmites or Carex paniculata sub-communities between the Phragmitetum or Caricetum paniculatae and Alnus woodland, as in certain of the Shropshire Meres (Sinker 1962, Meres Report 1980). In smaller basin mires, such as some of those in Anglesey, the Cladium sub-community can occur as a zone grading in open water to the Cladietum marisci or the Caricetum elatae or in a mosaic with the Schoeno-Juncetum and fen-meadow vegetation. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.055 Published online by Cambridge University PressFigure 16. Map and cross-section showing pattern of fen, fen-meadow and woodland vegetation at Market Weston Fen, Suffolk (by kind permission of Suffolk Wildlife Trust). M22aS25b Phragmites-Eupatorium fen, Carex paniculata sub-community on intact fen peat M22a Juncus subnodulosus-Cirsium palustre fen meadow, Typical sub-community on peat with some ground-water seepage, mown annually M24b Cirsio-Molinie tum fen-meadow, Eupatorium sub-community on raised areas among old peat-cuttings MlOa Schoeno-Juncetum fen, Caltha-Galium sub community in old peat-cuttings with ground-water seepage W5 Alnus-Carex paniculata woodland on peaty alluvium with flooding from river M24b M10aM10a M24b M24b W5 https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.055 Published online by Cambridge University Press242 Swamps and tail-herb fens Distribution "