"s26","Zonation and succession The community frequently occurs in open-water transitions and flood-plain and valley mires in association with other types of fen and passing, on wetter ground, to https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.056 Published online by Cambridge University PressS26 Phragmites australis-Urtica dioica fen 247 various kinds of swamp. Stands are sometimes extensive and may occur as a definite zone as in some of the Yare fens described by Lambert (1946) where a belt of the Epilobium sub-community, dominated by G. maxima or, less frequently, by P. australis, graded to the Glycerietum maximae alongside open water. In other cases, the community may pass to the Phragmitetum australis or the Caricetum paniculatae (e.g. Haslam 1965 in the Breck valley fens) or occur with the Caricetum ripariae (as in some of the Pembrokeshire valley and flood-plain mires: Ratcliffe & Hattey 1982). Very often, however, stands are fragmentary and form a patchy mosaic with richer fens of the Peucedano-Phragmitetum (in Broadland) or the Phragmites-Eupatorium community, on wetter and/or less disturbed ground, and tail-herb vege tation dominated by E. hirsutum or U. dioica in drier and/or more disturbed places. Stands of Alnusglutinosa- Urtica dioica or Alnus-Carex paniculata woodlands can occur with these patchworks and the Phragmites-Urtica fen is sometimes found in disturbed clearings within these woodlands. In mire remnants which have been grazed, the community may pass to fen meadow vege tation on drier ground. In eutrophicated and disturbed spring mires, zonations are often sharp, small stands of the community occurring alongside ditches or within Schoeno-Juncetum or grazed fen-meadow (Haslam 1965). By ditches and water-courses in agricultural land, too, patches or strips of the Phragmites-Urtica fen may be abruptly marked off from adjacent farmland, although here and in urban wetlands, the community can occur in fragmentary mosaics with tail-herb and weed vegetation where there is much disturbance. Where the Oenanthe sub-community occurs on the upper salt-marsh, it has been observed to pass sharply to the Atriplici-Elymetum pycnanthi moving downshore (Proctor 1980). Only in a few situations where waters are naturally eutrophic does the Phragmites-Urtica fen seem to be a primary vegetation type developed as part of a hydrarch succession. In most cases, it seems to be a secondary community which partly or wholly replaces richer fens in response to artificial enrichment and disturbance. Its dense cover does not appear easily open to the invasion of woody species but continued natural drying of the fen surface or drainage and subsequent abandonment may lead to the development of tail-herb vegetation without Phragmites which itself may represent a fairly stable phase in a deflected succession (Haslam 1965). Distribution "