"s27","Zonation and succession In more extensive and undisturbed open-water transitions, the Carex-Equisetum sub-community (and, rarely the Lysimachia sub-community) occurs as part of com plete zonations between submerged aquatic vegetation and woodland. Around lakes and some larger basin mires, it is generally fronted by a zone of the Caricetum rostratae, the Equisetetum fluviatile or, at scattered localities, especially in Scotland, by the Caricetum vesi cariae. Boundaries between these swamps and the Potentillo-Caricetum are often very hazy with a gradual increase in shallower water in Potentilla palustris and Menyanthes trifoliata and a continuing prominence of the swamp dominants within the fen. In other cases, virtually pure stands of P. palustris or M. trifoliata themselves may extend out into open water in front of the community (Matthews 1914, Spence 1964, Birse 1980, Lock & Rodwell 1981). At some sites, a belt of the Phragmitetum forms a more abrupt outer edge to the Potentillo-Caricetum (e.g. Pearsall 1918, Lock & Rod well 1981). On drier ground, the community may grade, through an open scatter of Salix cinerea bushes, to the Salix- Carex rostrata woodland in which some important Potentillo-Caricetum species remain as part of the understorey. There is little doubt that such sequences represent a natural succession around more mesotro- phic, sometimes base-rich and calcareous lakes and basins to the north and west. At Esthwaite Fen in Cumbria, it has been shown how the Potentillo-Caricetum has extended out behind a front of the Phragmitetum and been colonised from behind by S. cinerea over the past seventy years (Pearsall 1918, Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wilson 1978) and Lock & Rodwell (1981) adduced photographic evidence to support a similar succession at Crag Lough in Northumberland. Spence (1964) described a replacement of Caricetum rostratae by the Potentillo-Caricetum over fifty years on the shores of Loch Ness in Inverness, although at other sites there has been no perceptible change in the extent of these two communities. The levels of nutrients may play some part in influencing the rate of forward advance of the fen mat in such situations. Two things confuse this basic pattern of zonation and succession. The first is grazing, which can set back shrub and tree invasion where stock have access to the community. The effect of this is starkly visible at Crag Lough where a fence marks a sharp boundary between open Potentillo-Caricetum and closed Salix-Carex woodland. Grazing may also blur the boundary between the fen vegetation on the mire surface itself and that on the mineral or peaty soils surrounding it. Even where there is no woodland fringe to the community, this junction may be marked by a zone of Filipendulion vegetation, the Holco-Juncetum or the Phalaridetum arundinaceae at the limit of inundation or ground-water gleying. Where such margins are grazed, there tends to be a much more gradual transition from rush-pasture or fen-meadow communities to the Potentillo-Caricetum (e.g. Ratcliffe & Hattey 1982). The second feature, which has more complex results, is the variation in base-status, calcium content and nutrient levels that is very characteristic of soligenous areas in basins and around some raised mires. Such differences, which can be very marked over even short distances, are partly a function of distance from springs, seepage lines or streams but they can also be affected by ground-water fluctuations. The Potentillo-Caricetum is often found in places where it is difficult to separate the influence of soligenous, topogenous and ombrogenous effects and it frequently forms part of intricate mosaics with other mire communities. Particularly striking examples have been described from Sunbiggin Tarn in Cumbria (Holdgate 1955Z?) and Malham Tarn, North Yorkshire (Sinker 1960, Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975). Here, around the weaving inflow streams, the community occurs intimately mixed with the Carex rostrata-Calliergon fen in a baffling jumble of local differences in bryophyte distribution and dominance by a variety of Carices. The vagaries of dispersal and establishment may play some part in determining such patterns but they are probably also influenced by differences in water chemistry, although these have not been isolated (Proctor 1974, Wheeler 1980«, b, 1983). In such sites as these, there may also be more obvious zonations between either or both these fens and the Pinguiculo- Caricetum dioicae around highly calcareous springs and to Filipendulion vegetation along junctions with unflushed mineral soils or where banks of alluvium have been deposited by moving waters. A patchy development of the Salix-Carex woodland may add to the complexity. In less base-rich and calcareous mires, the Potentillo- Caricetum may occur in mosaics with poor-fen vege tation. Small patches of Sphagnum squarrosum and S. fimbriatum are sometimes found within stands of the community, where, for example, the surfaces of floating rafts are maintained at a high enough level to be free of frequent inundation (Wheeler 1980«, d; Lock & Rodwell 1981). Where such patches coalesce, other Sphagna, such as S. palustre, S. recurvum and S. teres, and Aulae omnium palustre may appear and Calliergon stra- mineum replace C. giganteum and C. cordifolium. Such changes mark a transition to the Carex rostrata-Sphagnum squarrosum community. In other places, the fading of any nutrient enrichment in the water flowing into basin or around raised mires is accompanied by a https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.057 Published online by Cambridge University PressS27 Potentillo-Caricetum rostratae tail-herb fen 255 gradation from the Potentillo-Caricetum to the much less species-rich Carex rostrata-Sphagnum recurvum mire, which has but scattered plants of M. trifoliata and P. palustris and a very poor representation of other herbs (e.g. Wheeler 1980af). Where fragments of ombro- trophic peat remain in such soligenous mires (as in the Malham fens) or where water tracks run in a well- defined lagg around raised mires, the community may pass very sharply to some form of ombrogenous bog or its derivative. Distribution "