"s28","Zonation and succession The community is often found as the terminating vege tation type around open-water transitions, marking the normal upper limit of water-level fluctuation. On the margins of lakes and pools it may pass, towards open water, directly to swamps such as the Phragmitetum australis, the Glycerietum maximae, the Typhetum lati foliae or the Sparganietum erecti, or there may be an intervening zone of the Phragmites-Eupatorium fen. Around enriched waters or in disturbed mires, the Epilobium-Urtica sub-community frequently forms an upper fringe to a patchwork of the Phragmites-Urtica fen. On the draw-down zones around reservoirs with silty shores, the community often passes sharply to a sequence of inundation communities. In its rare occurrences on salt-marches, the Phalaridetum normally forms a discontinuous and narrow fringe at the extreme upper limit, although in some estuaries it may occur further down-marsh above pioneer Scirpetum maritimi (e.g. Gilham 1957«). Similar zonations to those found around open standing waters, though often much condensed, are also characteristic of the margins of lowland water-courses with silty or clayey banks. On the more stony banks typical of faster-flowing streams over resistant rocks, the Phalaridetum is sometimes the only tall herbaceous fen vegetation, passing more or less directly to the moving open waters. On periodically inundated river shoals, clumps of the community may occur in mosaics with the Festuca arundinacea-Agrostis stolonifera community. Stands of the community may grade, at their upper edge, to Alnus glutinosa-Urtica dioica woodland or, by streams in upland margins, to Alnus glutinosa-Fraxinus excelsior-Lysimachia nemorum woodland, and occasionally clumps of P. arundinacea can occur in the field layers of these woodlands. Often, however, the upper margins of the Phalaridetum are sharply marked off from neighbouring pasture land. On drier soils where there is no grazing, there may be a more gradual transition through the Elymus-Holcus sub-community to some kind of Arrhenatheretum or to the Deschampsia cespitosa-Holcus lanatus grassland. On winter-flooded washlands, the Phalaridetum can pass, away from the less heavily grazed margins of dykes, to a mosaic of the Glycerietum fluitantis and the Agrostis stolonifera- Alopecurus geniculatus inundation grassland. Shrub and tree seedlings and saplings are rare in the Phalaridetum and no observational data is available as to succession but it seems most likely that the community progresses normally to the Alnus-Urtica woodland, or on the upland margins of the north and west, to the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland. Distribution "