"s4","Zonation and succession The wide ecological amplitude of Phragmites makes the Phragmitetum one of the commonest components of zonations in open-water transitions and flood-plain mires and means that a wide variety of other swamp and fen communities, with more exacting species, can be found in association with it. The Phragmitetum is also widespread in the more compressed or fragmentary sequences associated with dyke and canal margins and it has a scattered distribution within salt-marsh zonations. It also persists, sometimes because of deliberate treatment as a crop, in the often very complex patterns of vegetation associated with disturbed fens in flood-plain and valley mires. In more natural situations, the community occurs as part of zonations which can, in any particular site, be related most frequently to a gradient of water-level. In extensive open-water transitions it is often the most distal swamp type giving way directly, in deeper unpolluted waters, to floating-leaved or submerged aquatic vegetation. In some cases, stands are fronted by other swamp types: in lakes to the north and west, there is sometimes a belt of the Scirpetum lacustris (Pearsall 1918, Spence 1964) and this pattern was probably, at one time, more widespread (as in Broadland: see Pallis 1911, Lambert & Jennings 1951); in more eutrophic waters, the Typhetum angustifoliae occurs in this position (Lambert 1951) (Figure 12) or, in more sheltered sites in the rather peculiar conditions along the Yare valley in Norfolk, the Glycerietum maximae (Lambert 1946). Much conflated versions of these sequences occur com monly in mesotrophic and eutrophic dykes and canals (e.g. Haslam 1978). Where there is a substantial depth of water available for colonisation, it is usually the Phragmites sub community that leads such sequences or, in poorer waters especially over peat, the Menyanthes sub community (e.g. Birks 1973). In waters which are more shallow throughout, the Galium sub-community is more usual. Very commonly, a gradual reduction in waterlevel is matched by the Phragmites sub-community being replaced inshore by the Galium sub-community: this is the common pattern in larger lakes in Scotland and north-western England (e.g. Spence 1964). In these regions too, lake stands of the Phragmitetum tend to be less extensive, being often restricted to more nutrientrich areas of deposition, as around the deltas of input streams. This means that the community often forms a complex patchwork around the shores with other swamps like the Caricetum rostratae and the Caricetum vesicariae. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.034 Published online by Cambridge University Press146 Swamps and tail-herb fens Figure 12. Some typical zonations with the Phragmitetum swamp: (a) around a mesotrophic Norfolk Broad, (b) around a marl lake, (c) lowland ditch and (d) around a relatively impoverished Scottish loch. Cladietum marisci swamp Phragmitetum australis swamp Glycerietum maximae swamp Scirpetum lacustris swamp Caricetum rostratae swamp Caricetum vesicariae swamp Typhetum angustifoliae swamp Peucedano-Phragmitetum tail-herb fen https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.034 Published online by Cambridge University PressS4 Phragmitetum australis swamp and reed-beds 147 At some sites, the Phragmitetum may give way inshore, but still in standing water, to other swamp types. In oligotrophic calcareous waters, the Cladietum marisci may occur here, or in more mesotrophic situations, the Caricetum paniculatae (Lambert & Jennings 1951, Lambert 1951). Along the Yare, a narrow front of the Phragmitetum, resistant to scour, can protect a bank of the Glycerietum maximae (Lambert 1946). Frequently, however, the community gives way dir ectly to some form of fen. The more landward parts of these zonations are strongly influenced by the trophic state of the substrate and also by human interference which, pushing out to the limit of standing water, has made intact sequences increasingly rare. In the more complete transitions, the Phragmitetum may pass gradually, through the Galium sub-community and with a progressive increase in the number and variety of associates, to fen vegetation in which Phragmites remains a prominent component. On mesotrophic silts and organic soils, there can be a zonations to the Phragmites- Eupatorium fen; this is a common, though often rather fragmentary, pattern in some valley mires (e.g. Haslam 1965). On the fen peats of Broadland, the Phragmitetum can give way to the very rich and varied Peucedano- Phragmitetum (e.g. Pallis 1911, Lambert & Jennings 1951, Wheeler 1978). In more acid and oligotrophic waters, the community may pass to a swinging mat of the Potentillo-Caricetum rostratae (e.g. Pearsall 1918, Holdgate 1955Z>, Pigott & Wilson 1978) which sometimes seems to be able to grow through and beyond the Phragmitetum. In the agricultural lowlands, many transitions of this kind have been truncated by systematic drainage and, even in those few places, like Broadland, where extensive tracts of swamp and fen remain, zonations are very complex and sometimes abrupt because of differences in treatment applied piecemeal to marsh parcels (e.g. Lambert 1948). A very common feature of disturbed and eutrophicated sites throughout the lowlands is the juxtaposition of the Phragmites or Galium sub-communities with various kinds of Phragmites-Urtica fen, the Phalaridetum or tail-herb vegetation like the Epilobietum hirsu- tae. Narrow strips of these vegetation types also occur widely in sequences along the banks of dykes. Although stands of the Phragmites sub-community are also found in brackish dykes behind reclamation banks, the majority of salt-marsh and estuarine occurrences of the community are in sites without permanent standing water. Sometimes stands of the Atriplex sub community seem to be simply superimposed upon the existing salt-marsh zonation, occurring within Puccinel- lietum or Juncetum gerardi swards. In other cases, this sub-community forms part of the complex of vegetation types that occurs around the upper-marsh transition where there is litter accumulation and/or freshwater seepage. In estuaries, stands of the Phragmitetum sometimes occur in the inverted zonations associated with reversals of salinity gradient. When undisturbed, the Phragmitetum can be a very persistent community. Phragmites can retain its dominance under a wide variety of conditions and in optimal habitats stands can be very extensive and long-lived: Rudescu et al. (1965) estimated the age of some clones as in excess of 1000 years. Although seed-set, fertility and viability can be good (e.g. Hürlimann 1951, Bittman 1953, Spence 1964, Haslam 1972zz), conditions are rarely favourable for the growth of seedlings within existing stands, but this may be of little consequence with such an efficient system of vegetative renewal. Phragmites can attain a very high shoot density on healthy advancing fronts (Haslam 1971 a, 1972 a) and retain it within older stands, producing a canopy that, by mid-summer, has reduced light penetration below very substantially (But tery & Lambert 1965, Haslam 1971 a, 1972 a). In deeper water, it has few natural competitors and, on drier ground, an undisturbed litter mat can help prevent the establishment of other species (Haslam 1971 a). Stands which suffer moderate damage from frosting, burning or insect infestation seem to possess an ability to restore a balanced shoot production within a few seasons (Mook & van der Toorn 1982). The essential feature of successful competitors to Phragmites seems to be that they can capitalise on light levels under a given water and nutrient regime. Some achieve this by virtue of a different phenology to reed. Both those swamp helophytes which seem able to com pete with Phragmites in deeper waters, Glyceria maxima and Typha angustifolia, attain maximum shoot densities and a critical light interception by May, when the emergence of reed shoots is only one third or so com plete (Buttery & Lambert 1965, Mason & Bryant 1975). Moreover, G. maxima goes on producing shoots until late in the season and not until the shoots lodge is light penetration increased. Some other species require a drier substrate to invade. Cladium mariscus and Carex paniculata both seem able to take advantage of the period between the emergence of an accumulating Phragmites root felt above the water level and the build-up of litter on the now drier surface (e.g. Lambert 1951). Moreover, both are evergreen and somewhat shade-tolerant and well adapted to survive the gradual depression of the mat of Phragmites under the water with the slowly increasing weight of their bulky stocks. C. mariscus may have the additional advantage of a greater tolerance of oligotrophic con ditions than Phragmites (Lambert 1951). The establishment of most other species within the Phragmitetum depends upon some reduction in reed vigour to open the canopy and an amelioration of the blanketing effect of the accumulating litter mat. There https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.034 Published online by Cambridge University Press148 Swamps and tail-herb fens may be an opportunity for some species to invade in those situations where, with slow terrestrialisation, a still thin litter mat is exposed to decreasing periods of winter submergence with ever shallower waters. The development of the Galium sub-community from the Phragmites sub-community occurs in this way as rela tively shade-tolerant herbs are able to establish on the damp litter in spring. As the reed cover becomes less vigorous on the drier substrate, there may be a continuing natural succession to the richer vegetation of the Phragmites-Eupatorium or Peucedano-Phragmitetum fens and thence to fen carr (e.g. Tansley 1939, Lambert & Jennings 1951, Lambert 1951, Wheeler 1980c). At various stages in such sequences, winter-cropping of reed can help the Phragmitetum persist against the tendency towards invasion of competitors or confuse the natural succession. More drastic disturbance of the water regime or of the litter mat may produce a strong disruption in the natural growth rhythm of Phragmites, giving any invaders a season or more ’s advantage. The rapid drop in water level consequent upon drainage can produce such results (Haslam 1970c, 197la, b) as can very severe and repeated frost or mismanagement of reed-beds. If there is surface disturbance, eutrophication of oxidising organic matter is often followed by the development of the Phragmites-Urtica community with its very characteristic patches of nitrophilous tall herbs (e.g. Haslam 1965). The enrichment of dyke waters by fertiliser run off and sewage and the disturbance involved in dyke clearance and dredging is often marked by successions to this fen on the banks. On some ungrazed salt-marshes, the Phragmitetum has replaced parts of stands of the Spartinetum towns- endii but the status of the community in general successions of salt-marshes is difficult to assess (Ranwell 1961, 1964ZZ, 1972). Distribution "