"s5","Zonation and succession Extensive, virtually pure stands of the Glyceria sub community are quite common and sometimes com pletely choke small ponds, ox-bows or flat, narrow channels with standing or slow-moving water (Lambert 1947c, Haslam 1978). Frequently, however, the Glycerietum occurs as a definite zone in open-water transitions and riparian sequences, typically passing to the Sparganietum erecti in deeper water and, above, to the Phalaridetum aruncinaceae. Where banks shelve gently, the community may occur in both forms, the Alisma-Sparganium sub-community forming a fragmentary transition to the Sparganietum erecti and giving way above to a belt of the Glyceria sub-community. Such zonations are a very characteristic feature of pools and streams in the English lowlands. In the rather special conditions along the Yare, the Glyceria sub-community often abuts directly on to the open water of the broads as marginal ‘hover ’ or, especially where there is tidal scour, occurs behind a marginal fringe of Phragmitetum australis. Away from the open water, the Glycerietum usually gives way to some kind of fen vegetation in which both G. maxima and P. australis are important components, e.g. the Glyceria sub-community of the Peucedano-Phragmitetum or the Epilobium hirsutum sub-community of the Phragmites-Urtica fen. Although the abundance and vigour of G. maxima in such sequences clearly decline with increased distance from the moving broads water (Lambert 1946, Buttery & Lambert 1965), there does not seem to be a single, simple edaphic gradient related to this change. There seems no doubt, however, that once established under favourable conditions, G. maxima can play a major part in successions from open water to fen. It is capable of rapid growth (Syme 1872, Lambert 1947c), and can readily encroach upon open water provided there is some contact between the vegetation mat and underlying sediments: at the very front of marginal ‘hover ’ where the roots hang free in the water, there is a small reduction in growth and detached islands of Glycerietum quickly become chlorotic if they do not make renewed contact with the substrate (Buttery & Lambert 1965). In sluggish streams, in dykes and in pools, G. maxima litter may accumulate in stagnant conditions and aid terrestrialisation. On the Yare, the Glycerietum often initiates succession in more sheltered but irrigated situations (Lambert 1946). Here G. maxima seems to have a competitive edge over P. australis. These species have broadly similar upper limits of growth in relation to water level and both are tolerant, though by virtue of different growth habits, of the tidal rise and fall. G. maxima, however, begins growth earlier from shoots which in the previous autumn have already extended up to substrate level (Lambert 1947c) and the expanding leafy shoots rapidly reduce light penetration below (Buttery & Lambert 1965). There is thus a dense cover of vegetation even before the shoots of P. australis, with its deep-seated rhizomes and perennating buds, break the surface. Where mixed stands are mown early, G. max ima, with its good growth of aftermath, has the addi tional advantage of quick recovery over P. australis which, though starting later, produces a single flush of shoots and attains its standing crop maximum earlier. Where conditions begin to isolate growing Glycerietum on the Yare from the irrigating waters, its productivity has been shown to decline (Buttery & Lambert 1965). This isolation may happen by continued extension of the community into open water with slow peat accumulation towards the fen hinterland or within the relic arms of broads and in dykes which become blocked (Lambert 1946). It has been shown that, as G. maxima becomes, for some reason, unable to utilise available major nutrients, which may not themselves be externally limiting, P. australis can gain the ascendant because of some greater ability to tolerate conditions generally unfavourable to both species (Buttery & Lambert 1965). Like the other Broadland seres, the successions involving the Glycerietum are more complex than at first sight. Alongside streams and rivers, the accumulation of substrate beneath the Glycerietum seems more dependent upon silting than on the build-up of litter (cf. Tansley 1939). Winter floods readily wash away the G. maxima remains (Lambert 1947c) and the repeated disturbance of the mineral material itself may continually set back any successional advance of the community which maintains itself as a permanent fringe. Distribution "