"s9","Zonation and succession Sometimes, especially in the more oligotrophic upland lakes, the community represents the limit of swamp vegetation. Frequently, however, it occurs behind a front of the Scirpetum lacustris and/or Phragmitetum australis. The two sub-communities are themselves com monly zoned, with the Carex sub-community extending https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107340817.039 Published online by Cambridge University PressS9 Caricetum rostratae swamp 167 out into deeper water and giving way behind to the Menyanthes-Equisetum sub-community. This may grade laterally to the C. rostrata sub-community of the Equisetetum fluviatile with a switch in dominance to E. fluviatile and, in shallower water around some Scottish lakes, to the Caricetum vesicariae in which C. vesicaria is dominant with many of the same associates. In some cases, this kind of transition continues above in a gradual switch to the Potentillo-Caricetum with an increase in poor-fen herbs and larger Calliergonspp- (see also Matthews 1914) and there seems little doubt that this represents a standard kind of succession in fairly base-poor waters over organic substrates. Sometimes, however, this kind of smooth zonation is complicated by local variation in water throughput and enrichment around inflows and along seepage lines. Then, the Caricetum may be part of a complex patchwork of poor fens in which C. rostrata remains prominent but where the understorey varies in response to an increase in calcium and base-status, as in the C. rostrata-Sphagnum squarrosum community and certain types of Carex r os tr at a-Callier gon mire vegetation. This kind of rich local variation has been well described from some basin mires on Carboniferous Limestone, such as Malham Tarn in North Yorkshire (Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975) and Sunbiggin Tarn, Cumbria (Holdgate 1955b). It is also seen at the margins of some of the Scottish lakes (Spence 1964). In such situations, other sedges such as C. lasiocarpa and C. aquatilis may attain local prominence in standing water alongside C. rostrata. Where the Caricetum rostratae occurs in pools within non-calcareous basin mires or in peat cuttings in ombro- genous mires, it may grade to the more oligotrophic vegetation of the C. rostrata-Sphagnum recurvum community of the stagnant bog-pool margins.Distribution "