"sd1","Zonation and succession The Rumex-Glaucium community is sometimes the only vegetation to be seen on shingle beaches, forming an open zone isolated from the hinterland of the shore, where dune or inland communities sometimes occur, but where there is often now a sharp boundary with agricul-tural land or settlements, frequently behind sea-defences. With a shift to less stable conditions, however, or where lines of drift are deposited on the beach, the Rumex-Glaucium community can pass to annual strand-line assemblages, and on wider shores there can be gra-dations to vegetation of more consolidated beachsubstrates, either grasslands on shingle or dune commu-nities. Where shingle accumulation is progressive, such zonations may represent a succession, but usually the Rumex-Glaucium community persists as a perpetually renewed pioneer vegetation. Throughout the range of the community, the asso-ciated strandline vegetation is commonly of the Atriplex-Beta type, an assemblage typically found as strips on lines of decaying wrack and other detritus deposited at the tidal limits. G flavum and Crambe are sometimes recorded among such vegetation on shingle, and R. crispus var. littoreus remains quite common, but it is Beta vulgaris ssp. maritima and various Atriplex spp., together with Matricaria maritima, that provide much of its distinctive character. Such assemblages may come and go along the strandlines in successive seasons, or replace the Rumex-Glaucium community where stretches of beach do not remain stable from one year to the next. Sandier strandlines can see transitions from the shingle vegetation to the Honkenya-Cakile community. Here, again, Atriplex spp. are very common, and often locally abundant, and these, together with occasional R. crispus var. littoreus, B. vulgaris ssp. maritima and Silene vulgaris ssp. maritima, can provide some floristic conti-nuity with the Rumex-Glaucium community, but it is patches of Honkenya peploides, with Cakile maritima and Salsola kali, that usually mark out the broken strips of this vegetation that develop at extreme high water mark. Local accumulations of sand around the patches are prone to invasion by Elymusfarctus, Leymus arenar-ius and Ammophila arenaria, and this can initiate a tem-porary or progressive succession to fore-dunes. A very few sites, notably the beaches of north Norfolk, show a patchy but complete zonation from Typical Rumex-Glaucium vegetation, through the Honkenya-Cakile community and Elymus fore-dunes, to Ammophila vege-tation of varying degrees of maturity (Oliver 1913,1915, Ratcliffe 1977). In other places around the coast of east and southern England, where there is an increase in the stability and shelter of the shingle habitat, without any marked accu-mulation of wind-blown sand, the Typical form of the Rumex-Glaucium vegetation can pass landwards to the Lathyrus sub-community, and this in turn gives way to some distinctive grasslands in which dominance passes to Arrhenatherum, Festuca rubra and Silene vulgaris ssp. maritima, with an almost total occlusion of shinglehemicryptophytes. Orford Ness and Dungeness show the best development of this Arrhenatherum-Silene com-munity with, in the latter site, zonations to non-maritime Arrhenatheretum and uniquely extensive mosaics on compacted sandy shingle with Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex calcifugous grassland and scrub dominated by Cytisusscoparius. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.035 Published online by Cambridge University Press132 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities Another species which, very locally around the south-east coast, assumes prominence on sheltered shingle, especially on the leeward site of spits, is Suaeda vera. Its water-borne seed germinates very readily on accumula-tions of drift, the plants soon anchoring firmly with deep tap roots and then growing from shoots held horizontally under the pebbles, spreading outwards or extending in a single direction as shingle is shifted over the bushes. On Chesil Beach, for example, a patchy zone of open Elymo-Suaedetum, dominated by S. vera, replaces the Rumex-Glaucium community along the landward side of the bar, with its complex of fans and flats looking out over The Fleet (Oliver 1912, Tansley 1939). And, at Blakeney Point in Norfolk, this kind of vegetation runs around the drift-line of the sheltered embayments between the shingle laterals, replacing the Rumex-Glaucium commu-nity in the narrow strip that forms a transition on sandy pebbles from the dunes of the spit to the salt-marsh behind (Oliver 1913, Oliver & Salisbury 1913a, b). Distribution "