"sd10","Zonation and succession The Carex arenaria community is generally found as a minor element among zonations and mosaics of other vegetation types of coastal and inland sands, interrupt-ing the patterns wherever the sedge has been able to cap-italise on local deposition in sheltered places. It is replaced by other communities as more aggressive plants are able to dominate on still mobile sand or where, with increased stability of the surface, the vigour of the sedge wanes. Grazing may influence these successional changes or help bring about a renewed round of invasion on newly-disturbed ground. On coastal sites, the F. rubra sub-community is some-times found invading areas of sand among foredunes where the Elymus farctus community is the predominant colonising vegetation, but more often it appears among Ammophila and Ammophila-Festuca stands on some-what older mobile dunes, where marram has not yet asserted, or reasserted, its dominance. Boundaries between the vegetation types in these patterns are marked by shifts in the proportions of the monocotyle-dons, although Ammophila can be quite common and abundant among developing Carex vegetation, while the sedge persists frequently, though never as more than asub-dominant, in the Carex sub-community of Ammo-phila vegetation and in certain kinds of Ammophila-Festuca sward. The scattered occurrence throughout of associates like F. rubra and S. jacobaea can also accentu-ate the continuity among the vegetation cover. Where accretion is rapid, Ammophila readily assumes dominance over the sedge with a succession to these other communities in a resumption of the main trend of development, although local deposition of sand in shel-tered spots among the dunes and around blow-outs which subsequently form can favour a resurgence of https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.044 Published online by Cambridge University PressSD10 Carex arenaria dune community 197 Carex vegetation. Indeed, such a return to this pioneer community is possible among stretches of fixed dunes where the Festuca-Galium vegetation is often the succes-sor to the Ammophila-Festuca community where the sands remain calcareous. C. arenaria is a common asso-ciate in the sward and may be quick to take advantage of accretion, especially where Ammophila has become very debilitated. Boundaries are generally sharp in such situ-ations, though the margins of the Festuca-Galium turf may become fretted away by wind erosion or animal dis-turbance or blurred by a thin overlay of sand and, if the surface becomes stabilised once again, the richer sward can re-establish itself around the margins or among the Carex vegetation. In certain situations, however, it seems as if the sedge community can remain in long occupa-tion of fixed dunes, as on Blakeney where, with the dis-appearance of rabbits in the myxomatosis epidemic, C. arenaria attained a dominance that has not been readily challenged by F rubra (White 1961). Among coastal dunes built of more acidic sands, or where the surface has become strongly leached with time, the patterns are somewhat different. If accretion proceeds at a fairly modest rate, and especially where the sand is sufficiently acidic from the outset to inhibit the vigour of marram (Huiskes 1979), the sedge may play amore prominent role throughout the succession. Then, especially where the vegetation is grazed, the Carex community can give way to the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis or Carex-Cornicularia swards. In the former, mixtures of C. arenaria and smaller grasses usually dominate, with such Ammophila as is present often sparse andpuny, and the early appearance among the developing sedge cover of plants like Agrostis capillaris, H. lanatus, R lanceolata and Achillea millefolium, may make the boundaries between the vegetation types indistinct. Generally, however, high frequencies of Anthoxanthum odoratum, Luzula campestris and Galium saxatile char-acterise the later stages of sward development, together with the appearance of a variety of calcifuge bryophytes that hardly ever find a place on the still mobile sand. In other situations, perhaps where heavy rabbit grazing has played an important role in influencing the succession,the Carex-Cornicularia community can occupy much of the more stable sand surface. Here, again, the sedge retains a frequent and often abundant place in the vege-tation, commonly with some F. rubra and sparse marram, but Rumex acetosella and a variety of diminu-tive ephemerals now appear and there is typically anextensive carpet of lichens, with Cornicularia aculeata and a variety of Cladonia spp. particularly prominent. Where either of these swards becomes disrupted with degeneration and wind erosion, the Carex community can reappear on drifts of accumulated sand. A striking feature of some sites with this kind of pattern, as at Winterton, is the prominence, early in the successionand re-seeding for a few years within the more close turf, of Corynephorus (Marshall 1967). It is mixtures of grassy and lichen-rich swards that make up much of the vegetation context for the develop-ment of inland stands of the Carex community. Away from the coast, tracts of mobile sand are very localisedthough, in regions like Breckland, wind erosion of sandy soils has played an important part in the evolution of the landscape. Here, blow-outs have been observed forming (Watt 1937) as a result of the action of local cyclonic winds on degenerating Calluna-Festuca heath, Carex-Cornicularia or Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grasslands on sand-smeared podzols. Where these have become reduced to a mat of humus or a scabby carpet of lichens among decaying grass shoots, the surface is readily dis-rupted by the impact of sun, rain and wind, the sand accumulating in low dunes around the developing hollow or being blown away in shallow drifts by frontal erosion. It is on this newly-accreted material that the F. ovina sub-community of the Carex vegetation is able to get a hold, sometimes persisting for a considerable time in its impoverished form, in other places grading backinto grazed swards. Then, the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis or Carex-Cornicularia communities may form a transition to the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland, the contribu-tion of the sedge waning, and dominance passing to small tussock grasses, ephemerals and patches of lichens and bryophytes. Very occasionally in these fine mosaics, where there is a transition to less sandy soils of higher pH, the Carex community can be closely juxtaposed with the more basiphilous of the Breckland grassheaths of the Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus type (Watt 1940, Noble 1982). On shallower, stabilising drifts of sand where there is little or no grazing, an alternative successional develop-ment is the reappearance of heath, because in such con-ditions Calluna is an important competitor to C arenaria (Watt 1936,1937). On Breckland sands, it is the Calluna-Festuca community that is the usual kind of sub-shrub vegetation and its Carex sub-community, with co-dominant mixtures of heather and sedge, can form a transitional zone in shifts from more to less mobile substrates (Tidmarsh 1939, Gibbons 1975). C. arenaria also remains a constant feature of many stands of heath which develop on the more stable, acid sands of ungrazed or lightly-grazed coastal dunes. Around parts of the East Anglian coast, Calluna-Festuca heath indis-tinguishable from that inland can be found in such situa-tions but, elsewhere, Calluna-Carex heath is the usual community, with Erica cinerea or, much more locally, Empetrum nigrum spp. nigrum, invading along with the heather. Such heaths are sometimes subject to burningto regenerate the sub-shrub cover, and such treatment may help stimulate flowering among ageing C. arenaria (Tidmarsh 1939). https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.044 Published online by Cambridge University Press198 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities A further complication of such patterns is the appear-ance of Pteridium aquilinum, because the sedge and bracken are both able to spread rapidly on loose and deep, well-aerated substrates and, in both inland and coastal sites, the Carex community can be found in intimate association with bracken vegetation, thebalance between the dominants along the boundaries being related to the cyclical upbuilding and ageing of the Pteridium along its front (Watt 1936, 1940; Tidmarsh 1939). More mature stands of bracken in such patterns on acid sands tend to be of the Pteridium-Galium type, with Pteridium-Rubus underscrub developing on less base-poor and impoverished substrates. Distribution "