"sd11","Zonation and succession The Car ex-Cornicularia community is commonly found as a minor element in mosaics with calcifuge grasslands and heaths on the subdued topography of older dunes and sand plains. On siliceous sediments, these vegetationtypes may represent late stages in a distinctive line of succession, but they also develop where calcareous sands have been long-leached and may then occur among less mature and more basiphilous dune commu-nities, particularly in coastal sites. This vegetation can also be part of secondary cycles of succession related to renewed erosion and is probably often dependent for its continuing survival on heavy grazing, particularly by rabbits. Where this is relieved, the community probablygives way to heath or, where the ground is less impover-ished, to scrub and woodland. In the heart of its distribution in East Anglia, the Car ex-Cornicularia vegetation often occurs, at both coastal and inland sites, with the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland which, apart from the scarcity of C arenaria can be very similar in its physiognomy and com-position. In the Cornicularia-Cladonia sub-community of the grassland, for example, Cornicularia aculeata, Cladonia arbuscula, C. tenuis, C impexa, C foliacea, C. uncialis and C furcata all remain frequent and abun-dant, with D. scoparium, P. piliferum and R. acetosella, among an open tussocky turf of F. ovina and A. capil-laris. Transitions of this kind may reflect increasingstability of the surface, with the final extinction of the sand sedge, while in more scuffed and disturbed places,as along path edges, the Car ex-Cornicularia community may give way to the Erodium-Teesdalia sub-community of the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland with its richand varied suite of ephemerals. Gross disruption of the swards in such mosaics may result in erosion of the sand, with the development of blow-outs and tracts of freshly-deposited sediment (Watt 1938) and then there is anopportunity for renewed invasion by the sand sedge from rhizome fragments or by seed (Noble 1982),remnant stretches of sward occurring among young stands of the Carex community. Where the surface of such siliceous sands becomes quickly stable once again, the sedge decreasing in vigour and the spread of other perennials being restricted by inhospitable soil condi-tions, it is possible that the Carex-Cornicularia commu-nity re-establishes itself fairly quickly (Watt 1938) and this may represent a natural sequence on such base-poor sediments. In contrast to such situations in The Netherlands (Westhoff & den Held 1969), Germany (Oberdorfer 1978, Ellenberg 1978) and Poland (Matusz-kiewicz 1981), however, Corynephorus plays a very restricted role with us in the earlier stages, being an important colonist at just a few coastal sites (Marshall 1967) and remaining now at only a single inland station (Trist 1979). On sands which were initially more calcareous, as in many coastal dune systems, the persistence of Ammo-phila is a reminder that the Carex-Cornicularia commu-nity may represent a late stage in a rather different successional sequence, with marram playing the major https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.045 Published online by Cambridge University PressSD11 Carex arenaria-Cornicularia aculeata dune community 205 role in fixing the sediments before they become stable and leached. In such situations, the Carex-Cornicularia community can be found among older dunes, sometimes again with Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex swards or among stretches of Festuca-Galium grassland, particularly where the sands have not been so strongly decalcified. In the Luzula sub-community of such grassland, plants like F. ovina, L. campestris and H. radicata remain frequent in a turf with senile Ammophila and sometimes sparse C arenaria, and where the Carex-Cornicularia community extends into eastern Scotland, Astragalus danicus can occur throughout the zonation. Increasingly, however, with the shift to the wetter and cooler part of Britain, the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland becomes important as a transition between parched calcifuge swards of the Carex-Cornicularia type and the more closed grasslands of fixed dune sands. Then, such fragments of the formeras remain, grade almost imperceptibly through a thick-ening turf into Festuca-Galium vegetation, species such as Poa pratensis, A. capillaris, F. rubra, Galium verumand Lotus corniculatus becoming increasingly impor-tant, and bryophytes occluding lichens as the major cryptogamic element. Grazing is an important factor in maintaining mosaics of these different grasslands and some sites now betray ample evidence of the demise of rabbits or the cessation of sheep pasturing with an increase in size of the grass tussocks and a disappearance of the species demanding of open ground. A spread of Calluna is also very likely in such situations, the vegetation becoming increasingly heathy as the bushes multiply and enlarge. In East Anglia, such succession is usually to the Calluna-Festuca heath, among certain types of which Carex aren-aria and lichens remain very frequent and patchily abundant. Where the climate is not so strongly continen-tal, Calluna-Carex heath often develops from calcifuge dune grasslands, Erica cinerea being a common asso-ciate among lichen-rich vegetation with frequent C. arenaria, F ovina, L. campestris and A. praecox. Dis-turbed and enriched ground may have patches of Ulex-Rubus scrub with fragments of calcifuge sward persist-ing among the gorse bushes, while deep, loose sands can support dense Pteridium-Galium vegetation. Invasion of birch or pine may presage a development to some kind of Quercion woodland, typically, in the heart of the range of the Carex-Cornicularia community, of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia type. Distribution "