"sd12","Zonation and succession The Carex-Festuca-Agrostis community is typically found in zonations and mosaics with other grasslands and heath on the fixed sands of the hinterland of coastal dunes and sand plains, where the vegetation patterns are primarily determined by edaphic variation and differ-ences in treatment. Relaxation of grazing mediates a succession to heath or woodland, but most stands are maintained by continuing use as pasture for stock. Where stretches of fixed dunes have been reclaimed formore intensive agricultural use or for forestry or amenity purposes, the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland may survive more fragmentarily among improved swards orarable land, plantations or golf-course greens. Among the other kinds of grassland found on fixed sands, the community is most often seen with some type of Festuca-Galium vegetation, grading to this where the ground is more base-rich, with substrates of shell-sandthat is not so strongly leached or periodically renewed by very modest accretion. Species like C arenaria, fescues and P. pratensis continue to provide much of the cover in a fairly short sward with just scattered tufts of Ammo-phila, but F rubra generally exceeds F ovina, and there is usually a more consistent occurrence of G. verum, P. lan-ceolata, T. repens, L. corniculatus and A. millefolium. In the Luzula sub-community, however, L. campestris, A. capillaris, F ovina and Anthoxanthum become quite common and this sort of Festuca-Galium sward may pass imperceptibly to the Anthoxanthum sub-commu-nity of the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland where there are gentle shifts in the base-richness of the sands. On somewhat moister and less impoverished ground, the Holcus sub-community of the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland may grade to the Prunella type of Festuca-Galium sward. Where the sand retains a greater degree of mobility with the move on to younger dunes, the Festuca-Galium grassland passes in turn to Ammophila-Festuca vegeta-tion, where marram is still vigorous on the upbuilding surface and where the associates make up an often patchy cover between the tussocks. Sometimes, the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland itself gives way to the Ammophila-Festuca community in places where the sand has become mobile again with disturbance of the surface, but more often, and particularly where the sands are acidic, it is the Carex arenaria community that is the secondary colonising vegetation. In that vegetation, the https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.046 Published online by Cambridge University PressSD12 Carex arenaria-Festuca ovina-Agrostis capillaris dune grassland 211 cover can be much more open at first, with rejuvenated C. arenaria extending its rhizomes out through the loose sand, but the sedge may thicken up in time, and other associates appear, with tussocks of the fescues and scat-tered R acetosella and R lanceolata providing a measure of continuity with the more intact swards around. Indeed, on base-poor sands, this kind of invasion may be the natural line of primary succession that leads eventu-ally to the development of Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grass-land. On coasts in warmer and drier parts of Britain, and more locally elsewhere, the community can also be found on acidic sands with the Carex- Cornicularia vege-tation. In that assemblage, the sedge cover thins and the perennial grasses are reduced to scattered tussocks, with just occasional rosette herbs and patches of chamae-phytes and, very strikingly, a switch to lichens rather than pleurocarps as the dominant cryptogams. Such a change can be associated with concentrated rabbit activ-ity, but exposure to parching on sunnier dune slopes may also favour the development of the Carex-Cornicularia community on old erosion surfaces that have compacted and impoverished sands. Both the Carex-Cornicularia and especially the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis community are prone to invasion by Calluna and other ericoids where grazing is lax. In drier parts of the country, where both these vegetation typescan contribute to the swards on fixed acid sands, colon-isation by heather usually leads to the development ofthe Calluna-Festuca heath, where C. arenaria can remain locally prominent with F. ovina and occasional A. capil-laris, G. saxatile and R acetosella, along with D. scopar-ium and H. cupressiforme in the ground carpet. Erica cinerea may also occur in such heath in East Anglia, but this plant becomes much more common in northern and western localities where the Calluna-Carex heath is the usual kind of dune ericoid vegetation. Here again, mix-tures of sub-shrubs, C. arenaria and F. ovina provide a diagnostic element, but L. campestris, Anthoxanthum and various bryophytes give greater floristic continuity with the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland. In this type of dune heath in eastern Scotland, Empetrum nigrum tends to replace E. cinerea as the associated sub-shrub. Quite often, where grazing has fluctuated in intensity complex mosaics of heath and grassland occur on pas-tured dunes, the expansion of the sub-shrubs within the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis community being held or pushed back by renewed predation by stock. Elsewhere,neglect has allowed the development of leggy heather which excludes virtually all associates until it begins to degenerate. Or, where seedling shrubs and trees get away, there may be transitions to scrub or woodland, withbirch and pine, more locally oak, leading a succession to Quercion vegetation. Then, there may be patches of the Pteridium-Galium community where bracken has pre-empted the spread of heather in the grassland or shaded it out, with Ulex-Rubus scrub marking places that have been disturbed or enriched. Fragments of all these may survive, along with patches of the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis vegetation, around plantations on dunes, infield corners of improved pastures and on golf-course rough. Distribution "