"sd17","Zonation and succession Among complexes of dune slacks, the Potentilla-Carex community occupies wetter and less base-rich hollows,where there can be considerable fluctuations in ground water levels, generally among stable dune ridges with fixed grasslands. Repeated substantial inundation help maintain the community but where drying conditions combine with a reduction in grazing, this vegetation canbe readily invaded by shrubs and trees. Shifts from the Potentilla-Carex community to the Festuca-Galium grassland, which provides its usual context, can be quite sharp where there is a markedchange in slope and ground water levels on the sur-rounding dune ridges. Often, however, particularly onthe sand-plains of north-west Scotland where this kind of slack vegetation is especially common, the shifts are gradual. Then, the Carex flacca sub-community of thePotentilla-Carex vegetation can pass gently to the Pru-nella sub-community of the Festuca-Galium grassland over undulating machair whose whole patchwork ofswards is used for extensive pasturing. Very commonly, too, in Scotland, the Potentilla-Carex community forms part of a continuum with wetter grasslands to the vegetation of swamps and mires (Dargie 1993). Then it is particularly the Caltha and Hydrocotyle-Ranunculus sub-communities that play a prominent role, the latter often passing to the Eleochari-tetum swamp in open waters with Phragmitetum more locally. The Festuca-Agrostis-Potentilla grassland and something like the Caltha-Cynosurus pasture can figure with the former, though data accumulated since theNVC suggests the existence of undescribed assemblages of this general type in which Carex nigra continues to play a prominent role (Dargie 1993). Where stagnation of less base-rich waters occurs in the wetter hollows of dune systems in northern Britain, peat can accumulate and sustain wet heath of the Scirpus-Erica or Erica-Sphagnum types. With these veg-etation types, the Potentilla-Carex community can form complex mosaics and transitions. Distribution "