"sd18","Zonation and succession The Hippophae community is usually found in mosaics with dune grasslands, weedy tall-herb vegetation and other kinds of scrub developed over less heavily grazed stretches of fixed sands. It develops as a part of natural successions in its east coast localities, elsewhere as an introduction, and, where it is not overtopped, it couldperhaps have a measure of stability in more exposedhabitats. However, many of our stands are too young for us to know what the end product of this succession might be. Although Hippophae scrub can extend on to quite mobile sands carrying the Ammophila community, it is commonly seen among Ammophila-Festuca vegetation on somewhat more stable sediments. Then, there can be a continuous gradation between the Festuca sub-com-munity of the scrub and the dune swards around, mix-tures of Ammophila, F. rubra and R pratensis assuming dominance away from the buckthorn bushes. Leymus can be prominent in the dune vegetation, too, and at some localities along the Lincolnshire and Norfolk coasts, there is a local abundance of Elymus pycnanthusthroughout the zonation. Where the Hippophae cover thickens, the Festuca sub-community can then give way to the Urtica-Arrhenatherum sub-community. In certain sites, this basic pattern is complicated by the occurrence of Ammophila-Arrhenatherum grassland, the Arrhenatherum sub-community of which can grade into both the Ammophila-Festuca dune vegetation with the disappearance of Arrhenatherum, Dactylis glomer-ata, Heracleum and Cirsium arvense or into denserpatches of scrub with the appearance of clumps of Urtica and tangles of G aparine and Solanum. The Arrhenatherion plants may also provide continuity with stands of Rubus-Holcus underscrub where brambles dominate among mixtures of rank grasses and weedy herbs, or there may be stands of tall-herb vegetationdominated by Urtica or Epilobium angustifolium. Then, locally, the occasional bushes of Sambucus seen among the Hippophae may thicken up with transitions to Crataegus-Hedera or Prunus-Rubus scrub from among which the buckthorn is eventually shaded out. With time and shelter from winds, it is possible that such scrub on dunes progresses to Carpinion woodland but even our Hippophae scrub still seems to be in an immature state compared with, for example, Dutch stands and we havelittle information about what the natural successions beyond buckthorn stands might be. Distribution "