"sd2","Zonation and succession Along some stretches of shore, the Honkenya-Cakile community is the only kind of maritime vegetation to be seen above the tidal limit, but elsewhere it occurs in zonations with other sand and shingle communities, the patterns being strongly dependent on the deposition and erosion of beach material of different grades, and thefrequency of addition of organic detritus. Most existing stands can be regarded as perpetually renewed pioneer vegetation, although where opportunity arises, the pro-gressive accumulation of sand over and around the com-munity can initiate a dune succession. On beaches that are naturally narrow, or where the shore hinterland has become occupied by settlements or converted to agricultural or recreational use, often behind some sort of sea defence, the Honkenya-Cakile community can occur isolated as a narrow open zone of vegetation just above the tidal limit. In such situations, stands may be very fragmentary and, along any onestretch of beach, not very long-lived, with the additional threat of trampling where beach use is heavy. Even here, however, there can be considerable floristic differences between and along stands, particularly in the varying development of the summer annuals, with species such as P. oxyspermum ssp. raii and A. glabriuscula giving some https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.036 Published online by Cambridge University Press138 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities measure of regional contrast. And, where there is a shift from sand to coarser shingle in moving along beaches, a common feature where longshore drift operates on extensive lengths of coast, the community can give wayto other kinds of strandline vegetation. In southern Britain, its counterpart on drift-enriched pebbles is the Atriplex-Beta community, where Atriplex spp., particu-larly in this case A. prostrata, remain common and abun-dant, but where Cakile and Honkenya are much reduced in frequency, B. vulgaris ssp. maritima and Matricaria maritima greatly increased. To the north, along sheltered shingly strandlines in Scotland, there is an analogousswitch to the Matricaria-Galium community, with A. glabriuscula this time providing some floristic similarity, but where M. maritima, Galium aparine and Stellaria media become a more or less constant feature. Where a sandy beach top runs along the front of shingle deposits that are beyond the reach of all but very extreme tides, the Honkenya-Cakile community can be replaced by open Rumex-Glaucium vegetation. There, Honkenya can persist with some vigour on sandy patches, its stolons sometimes burrowing down into theunderlying pebbles (Tansley 1939) and Atriplex spp. may thrive on local accumulations of organic detritus, but itis coarse perennial hemicryptophytes like R. crispus var. littoreus, Glaucium and Crambe that provide most of the character of the shingle assemblage. In other places, a shingle spine or low hinterland behind a beach top has provided a suitable base for the development of dunes by the accretion of sand blown infrom flats exposed at low tide. In such situations, the Honkenya-Cakile vegetation can form a narrow, inter-rupted front to sequences of dune communities, the sandy patches around the plants giving way to a broken line of Elymus farctus foredunes, these in turn passing to Ammophila yellow dunes, with Leymus arenarius playing an important part in these younger stages at sites down the east coast. Honkenya, Cakile, Salsola and Atriplex spp. can persist for some time in these kinds of vegeta-tion as accretion progresses, but they are quickly over-whelmed as bigger mobile yellow dunes develop. Inmany of our dune systems, however, it is clear that both the Honkenya-Cakile stands and the Elymus foredunes are repeatedly renewed as bouts of fierce wind erosionand occasional tidal surges destroy the beach-top vege-tation and set back any advance of the sere. Distribution "