"sd3","Zonation and succession The Matricaria-Galium community often occurs as an isolated strip of vegetation running along the strandline, although it is sometimes contiguous downshore with marine algal swards and, with a shift to finer beachmaterial, can grade to upper salt-marsh vegetation. It is essentially a repeatedly-renewed pioneer assemblage and, even where it occurs on drift thrown high on to beaches, forming a front to dunes or various non-mar-itime communities, it cannot be seen as a serai precursor to them. Along very sheltered shores, the lower edge of Matri-caria-Galium stands can be regularly lapped by high tides and there the community may give way directly below to a zone of fucoids, usually Fucus vesiculosus or F. spiralis, with Mertensia in some of its localities, as on the Treshnish Isles off Mull, extending a little way into the littoral (Jermy & Crabbe 1978). In other places along the north-west coast of Scotland and on Shetland, the rare Atriplex praecox is abundant in a zone interposed between the strandline and the marine algae (Tasche-reau 1985). Elsewhere, with a shift to finer substrates or over the silt-or sand-smeared shingle that often forms a base for salt-marsh development around the hands of Scottish sea-lochs, the Matricaria-Galium community can peter out among upper salt-marsh vegetation. The most similar assemblage among these is the Elymetum https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.037 Published online by Cambridge University Press142 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities repentis, a community of moist, drift-strewn soils around high tide mark, in which A triplex spp., R. crispus and Matricaria continue to find a place but where the grasses occasionally seen in the Matricria-Galium vege-tation, such as Elymus repens, Festuca rubra and Agrostis stolonifera, form the more extensive basis of a rank, weedy sward. A further, very distinctive zonation can be seen around some Scottish sea-lochs where the Matricaria-Galium community has developed on drift abutting freshwater seepage zones along the beach top. Here, it can form a low weedy front to the Filipendulo-Iridetum, plants like the Atriplex spp., Matricaria and Galium aparine running in as a sparse understorey, together with Agrostis stolonifera and Poa trivialis, to Irispseudacorus,Filipendula ulmaria and Oenanthe crocata in the Urtica-Galium or Atriplex sub-communities of the tall-herb fen. Distribution "