"sd4","Zonation and succession The Elymus farctus community typically occupies a dis-tinct zone on the foreshore, occurring above the strand-line vegetation and fronting such other dune assemblages as are present. Along more exposed https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.038 Published online by Cambridge University Press146 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities stretches of beach, perhaps in most of our dune systems now, it functions as a repeatedly renewed pioneer assem-blage, but theoretically it can initiate a dune succession. Very often, the Elymus farctus community occurs in close association with the Honkenya-Cakile vegetation and, quite commonly, the two form an ill-defined linear mosaic of vegetation strung out along and just above strandlines subject to varying periods of erosion and accretion. The two assemblages intergrade continuously, being distinguished according to whether dominancelies with Honkenya and the strandline annuals on the one hand or with E. farctus on the other, this reflecting the balance between continuing disturbance by sea and wind along and just above the tidal limit and progressive accumulation of sand. In other places, where accretion has been able to continue unchecked, a better-defined and wider zone of Elymus farctus vegetation can be seen above the strandline, distributed over gently undulating stretches of sand or on distinct dunes, these sometimes very few and irregularly distributed, in other placesnumerous, rising in height towards the beach top and developed in lines parallel to the shore. Particularlyalong the coasts of north-east England and in Scotland, this simple pattern can be complicated by transitions between Elymus vegetation and foreshore Leymus stands. Along some coasts, such may be the limit of dune veg-etation, the sequence of communities being abruptly ter-minated inland by a switch to agricultural enclosures or golf-course rough and greens on reclaimed andimproved soils or to settlements and industrial develop-ments. More extensive sequences occur quite widely, however, and here the Elymus community typically occurs on foredunes which front larger yellow dunes with sometimes, behind these, immobile dunes and stretches of undulating sandy ground. Usually, in such situations, the Elymus vegetation passes to Ammophila dune stands, E. farctus and, to a lesser extent, plants such as Honkenya, Cakile and A triplex spp. retaining somerepresentation in the transitional zone. Patterns of thiskind can be seen all around the coasts of England and Wales, with Leymus vegetation and intermediate stands also figuring in the zonations along the coasts of North-umberland and at some sites in Lincolnshire. In its turn, the Ammophila community may give way to Ammophila-Festuca vegetation with Festuca-Galium assemblages becoming important in northern Britain. The studies of Harris & Davy (1968a, b) along the north Norfolk coast have demonstrated very clearly that strandline stands of Elymus farctus are maintained in more disturbed situations only by continual replenish-ment from such vegetation on foredunes behind and suggested that the classic serai progression might not occur very readily. Obviously, this has happened in past times, when it islikely that Elymus foredunes have been succeeded by Ammophila dunes and these in their turn by more stable tracts of vegetated sand. Along the outer fringes of our dune systems at the present time, however, the Elymus community may persist widely as a pioneer vegetation that is continually set back by more disturbed periods of wind and wave erosion. Distribution "