"sd5","Zonation and succession In many dune systems, particularly in southern and western Britain, Leymus has at most a minor role among younger dunes carrying the Elymus farctus and Ammo-phila communities but, along those coasts where Leymus vegetation is better developed, it usually dominates in amore or less well-defined zone between these two other assemblages, or tends to replace the Ammophila commu-nity as the most important builder of mobile dunes. In some areas, the Leymus community has increased its extent considerably within living memory but, even where it forms part of more extensive sequences, backed by other vegetation types on shifting or fixed dunes, such zonations do not necessarily represent straightforward successional developments. Through much of its range, Leymus vegetation occurs in close association with the Elymus farctus foreshore community, sometimes replacing it in a clear zonation with a shift a little way up the beach away from the strand-line with its more severe bouts of wind erosion and tidal disturbance, in other cases occurring intermixed with it in a complex linear mosaic over small foredunes runningalong the shore. Floristically, the two assemblages inter-grade continuously through the Elymus sub-community https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.039 Published online by Cambridge University Press150 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities of the Leymus vegetation, but changes in dominance from the one grass to the other effectively distinguish them, the E. farctus community also generally retaining a more consistent scattering of strandline survivors like Honkenya, Cakile and Atriplex spp. Where Ammophila also invades mobile sand in which Leymus, and sometimes E. farctus too, have got a hold above the limit of even the extreme tides, the zonations are more complex. In such situations, the Leymus com-munity may give way behind to a distinct zone of Ammo-phila vegetation on bigger shifting dunes, but there can be transitional stretches where Leymus remains as animportant subsidiary element among the marram. This Leymus sub-community of the Ammophila vegetation has been recorded in these sequences at scattered local-ities up the east coast of Britain and occasionally on western shores. In other places, particularly over fore-dunes along the Lincolnshire and Humberside coasts and more locally in Northumberland, E. farctus also plays a prominent role right through a compressed zona-tion, with the Leymus-Elymus sub-community of Ammophila vegetation occurring behind the Elymus type of Leymus dune. In shifting further north up the eastern coast of Britain, the Leymus community tends to become more important among the vegetation of the younger mobile dunes, giving way behind to the somewhat more stable kinds of Ammophila assemblage, of the Festuca and Poa sub-communities, on sand that is a little more fixed. Leymus can persist as an occasional there and the Festuca sub-community of Leymus vegetation, with its scattered plants of Elymus repens, Sonchus arvensis and Hypochoeris radicata sometimes forms a transitional zone. But, eventually, such lyme grass as has not been overwhelmed by sand accretion loses its vigour and diesout, the plant hardly ever extending into the Ammophila-Poa or Festuca-Galium communities that cover much of the fixed sand of dunes and stretches of machair around our northern coasts. Distribution "