"sd6","Zonation and succession Where there is little opportunity for accretion of wind-blown sand above the tidal limit, fragmentary stands of https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.040 Published online by Cambridge University Press158 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities the Ammophila community may be the only kind of veg-etation maintaining itself on a narrow and ill-defined zone of low dunes exposed to the constant threat of erosion. In more extensive systems, though, this commu-nity can occupy wide tracts of mobile sand accumulat-ing behind strandline and foredunes, and giving way inland to stretches of more stable material deposited in fixed dunes or on sand plains. The zonations of vegeta-tion types across such landscapes have a generalisedform in which the Ammophila community represents an immature phase between the pioneer foreshore assem-blages and the more permanent products of succession on ground where accretion and erosion have come to a halt. However, the dynamics of dune development, and the accompanying vegetation changes, are often complex and the communities represented inthe sequences also vary considerably according to thephytogeographic influence of regional climate on the dune flora. Later stages in the successions are increas-ingly affected, too, by biotic factors like grazing and land treatment, which is often intensive and destructive of natural patterns. Throughout, there may be additional variation in the vegetation types related to the hydrology of the dune system, slacks or pools interrupting thebasic zonation. The Ammophila sub-community itself sometimes comprises the pioneer zone of vegetation on sand depos-ited above the tidal limit, helping to build up foredunes set back a little way from some kind of assemblage on the strandline and usually clearly marked off from itfloristically. Along many shores around Britain, however, the Elymus farctus community precedesAmmophila vegetation, establishing itself within the zone of periodic tidal inundation, colonising the strand-line itself and then stimulating modest accretion of wind-blown sand. Where this raises the beach level suffi-ciently, it can be instrumental in allowing Ammophila to invade, such that the low foredunes are occupied by the transitional Elymus sub-community, with its strandline survivors. Particularly down the eastern coast as far as Norfolk, Leymus arenarius complicates this basic zona-tion, being able to colonise a little further down the beach than Ammophila, sometimes invading an Elymus zone or coming to dominate in virtually pure stands on young dunes, when the Elymus-Leymus or Leymus sub-communities form a transition to the Ammophila sub-community on the bigger dunes behind. The Lincolnshire and Humberside coasts have some complex zonations in which all three of these grasses play a part. Except locally in Northumberland and parts of north-east Scotland, Orkney and Shetland, it is the Ammophila community rather than the Leymus vegetation which is the more important on younger mobile dunes and, eventhere, the latter begins to be excluded with accretionabove a certain speed and height. Around the whole coast, the species-poor Ammophila sub-community is the usual vegetation type where sand mobility is at its peak closer to the coastline or in the recolonisation ofmore catastrophic blow-outs in the dune hinterland,with the Carex sub-community figuring very locally on freshly-stabilised sand or where bared ground is a little moister. Further back in the dunes, where accretion has begun to slow down, the Ammophila sub-communitytypically gives way to the slightly richer and more varied Festuca sub-community or, increasingly towards themoister and cooler north of Britain, the Poa sub-com-munity. On dune systems where there is a more extended gra-dation from mobile to fixed sand, one or other of these latter kinds of Ammophila vegetation generally forms a transition to the Ammophila-Festuca community on dunes where accretion is appreciably slower and erosion increasingly rare (Figure 12). Here in addition to con-stant P. pratensis and F. rubra, which can increase their cover appreciably among the Ammophila, species such as Senecio jacobaea, Hypochoeris radicata, Taraxacum officinale agg., Galium verum and Lotus corniculatus, at most only moderately frequent in the Ammophila com-munity, become very common. In addition, Carex aren-aria and Hieracium pilosella are often found, while there are many occasional associates, including numerous plants hardly ever found on mobile dunes, such as Plan-tago lanceolata, Leontodon taraxacoides, Luzula cam-pestris and Cerastium fontanum. A number of bryophytes, too, increase their frequency and cover, with Brachythecium albicans, Tortula ruralis ssp. ruraliformis and Hypnum cupressiforme s.l becoming especially important, while on more open patches of the essentially stable surface, a variety of diminutive annuals come and go. Around our more southerly shores, Ononis repens is a further distinctive newcomer with the shift from what is usually the Festuca sub-community of the Ammophila vegetation to the Ononis or Viola sub-communities of Ammophila-Festuca vegetation. North of the Solway-Forth line, it is the Poa type of Ammophila dune which generally passes behind to the Typical or Hypnum sub-communities of the Ammophila-Festuca dune. In its turn, the Ammophila-Festuca dune can grade on fixed sand where the surface pH is often a little below neutral, though less drought-prone, to the Festuca-Galium community, a vegetation type widely distributed on older dunes all around the British coast, though espe-cially extensive on the sand-plains of the machair along the north-west Scottish seaboard. Bouts of erosion in both the Ammophila-Festuca community and, less com-monly, in the Festuca-Galium vegetation can lead to a local regeneration of the Ammophila community with sharper floristic boundaries at the switch to the newly mobile sand and, where there are more substantial shifts https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.040 Published online by Cambridge University PressSD6 Ammophila arenaria mobile dune community 159 in dune dynamics, whole areas of partly stabilised dune may be overtaken by freshly deposited sand on which the more immature vegetation gains a hold again. In this way, stands of the Ammophila community can be found developing next to calcifugous grassland, heath or other vegetation types of the dune hinterland before the sandfinally comes to a halt. Other variations on the basic zonation reflect edaphic and treatment differences. Where the sands are some-what more fixed, and particularly where there is little grazing, the Ammophila community may give wayinland, not to the Ammophila-Festuca vegetation, but to the Ammophila-Arrhenatherum community, the Gera-nium sanguineum sub-community of warm, south-facing dune slopes being particularly distinctive with its mixtures of Arrhenatherum, G sanguineum, Ononis rep ens, Dactylis glomerata, Galium verum and Veronica chamaedrys, together with occasional low bushes of Rosapimpinellifolia, among the Ammophila, P. pratensis and F rubra. Especially good examples of this kind of pattern can be seen on the Northumbrian dune systems. More species-poor rank mesophytic swards of the Ammophila-Arrhenatherum type can also sometimes form an intermediate zone between the Ammophila com-munity and dune-slack surrounds but these wetter areas Figure 12. Simplified zonation of vegetation types on strandline, embryo, semi-fixed and fixed dunes in southern Britain. The strandline has fragmentary SD2 Honkenya-Cakile vegetation with embryo dunes building around SD4 Elymysfarctus community behind. Then, there are mobile dunes with SD6 Ammophila vegetation and, behind, semi-fixed dunes with the SD7 Ammophila-Festuca community. A large blow-out on one ridge has the SD10 Car ex arenaria community. To the rear, the fixed dunes have SD8 Festuca-Galium grassland.more often occur in depressions among more stable dune ridges where Ammophila-Poa or Festuca-Galium vegetation covers the surrounding slopes. Distribution "