"sd7","Zonation and succession In ageing dune systems, the Ammophila-Festuca com-munity can occupy the first zone inland of the strandline on sand which has become more or less fixed but, where growth is still active, this vegetation is characteristically set back behind banks of foredunes and mobile dunes supporting different communities, only finding a place further towards the shore where there is a measure of local shelter. Inland, it can give way over ridges and sand-plains to dune grasslands and heath typical of https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.041 Published online by Cambridge University PressSD7 Ammophila arenaria-Festuca rubra semi-fixed dune community 167 largely stabilised surfaces, the sequence of vegetation types sometimes clearly representing a succession. However, the patterns are often interrupted by zonations to slack communities, where the height of the water-table mediates the vegetation gradient, and are much influenced landwards by treatments and land improve-ment or reclamation. In the most abbreviated beach-top sequences, where accretion and erosion are much reduced, there can be a sharp transition from the shore, sometimes with a strip of strandline vegetation, to more open stands of the Ammophila-Festuca community. Generally, though, even where the sand supply has become much reduced, the exposed face of the most seaward dunes carries the Ammophila community, the Ammophila-Festuca vegeta-tion being limited to the lee slopes where the material is much less mobile. In southern Britain, it is the Ononis sub-community which is characteristic of these youngersheltered faces, with a zone of the Festuca sub-commu-nity of the Ammophila vegetation sometimes interposed in the transition to very open marram on the exposed, shifting sand. Around northern coasts, Typical Ammophila-Festuca vegetation replaces the Ononis sub-community, with the Poa type of Ammophila vegetation occurring where there is a more gradual shift to the imma-ture marram. Then, especially down the east coast, and where the dunes remain low, these early sequences can be complicated by the persistence of Leymus arenarius, the Festuca sub-community of Leymus vegetation sometimes occurring on more mobile or disturbed surfaces among tracts of Typical Ammophila-Festuca grassland. Where the zonations continue on to sand which is becoming more fixed, the Ononis and Typical sub-com-munities usually give way to the Hypnum type, the differ-ent vegetation types sometimes being found as distinctzones but more usually disposed in complex mosaics over surfaces of individual dunes or ridges where there is a diversity of aspects variously sheltered from the windand sun. Locally severe erosion may result in a rejuvena-tion of the Ammophila community or the spread of Car ex arenaria vegetation in blow-outs within such pat-terns. More local appearance of bare but still quite stable sand is often marked by patches of the Tortulo-Phle-etum, particular on dune systems in the warmer and drier south of Britain. In bigger dune systems, where there are expanses of fixed sand which have not been reclaimed, the more mature kinds of Ammophila-Festuca vegetation are fre-quently transitional inland to closed dune grassland, usually of the Festuca-Galium type. Here, Ammophila often remains very common, but it is generally much reduced in vigour, with Festuca rubra and Poapratensis now typically providing the bulk of the grass cover. By this stage, the sands have become somewhat richer in organic matter and nutrients, and are more water-reten-tive, so the swards fill up and take on a more mesophytic character. Plants that are generally only occasional in the Ammophila-Festuca community become very fre-quent with Galium verum, Plantago lanceolata, Trifo-lium repens, Lotus corniculatus and Achillea millefolium especially distinctive, Ranunculus acris, Bellis perennis and Euphrasia officinalis agg. sometimes important,and a variety of other grasses, sedges and dicotyledons appearing that hardly ever figure on the more mobile, droughty and impoverished sands. Mosses such as Tortula ruralis ssp. ruraliformis and Homalothecium lutescens remain common but some pleurocarpous species like Rhytidiadelphus squarrosus, R. triquetrus, Calliergon cuspidatum and Pseudoscleropodium purum also occur among the turf. Grazing also has a more obvious effect upon the appearance of the vegetation than is the case with the communities of more mobiledunes sometimes trimming down the herbage to a short sward, but open patches are scarce and, where scuffing or droughting of the surface creates a gap, the appear-ance of assemblages of annuals is usually best seen as a transition to recurring Ammophila-Festuca vegetation. As with the communities of more mobile sand, there are some regional differences among the various kinds of Festuca-Galium grasslands, some of the most striking and extensive zonations occurring over the sand-plains along the very wet north-west seaboard of Scotland. There, the Typical and Hypnum sub-communities of Ammophila-Festuca vegetation on the semi-mobile dunes give way on the stretches of machair to the Ranunculus-Bellis and Prunella sub-communities of the Festuca-Galium grassland. More locally, rather different zonations can be seen. Where there is little or no grazing on less mobile sands, a rather rare kind of situation on British dunes, the Ammophila-Festuca community can give way to the Ammophila-Arrhenatherum vegetation. This is a gener-ally rather rank sward which has a number of character-istic plants in common with other assemblages of surfaces that are becoming fixed, like Festuca rubra, Poa pratensis, Ononis repens, Galium verum, Lotus cornicula-tus and Achillea millefolium, but the transition differs from zonations to the Festuca-Galium grassland in the prominence of Arrhenatherum elatius and Dactylis glo-merata. These, and plants such as Heracleum sphondy-lium and Lathyrus pratensis often bring the vegetation close to an inland Arrhenatherion sward, but in someplaces the Ammophila-Festuca community passes on sunny, south-facing dune faces to a more striking kind of Ammophila-Arrhenatherum in which Geranium sanguin-eum is a constant feature, with scattered bushes of Rosa pimpinellifolia. A more common variation occurs where the sands have become more sharply surface-leached on the fixed dune surfaces, when the Ammophila-Festuca commu-https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.041 Published online by Cambridge University Press168 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities nity can give way to the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grass-land. Here, again, Ammophila is often reduced to a minor and not very vigorous component in the swards, but F rubra and P. pratensis are now usually matched in frequency and often in cover by F. ovina, A. capillaris and C. arenaria. Plants like Hypochoeris radicata, Lotus corniculatus and Galium verum remain fairly common but, with the increased importance of Galium saxatile, Luzula campestris, Rumex acetosella and acidophilous bryophytes, the vegetation approaches a dry calcifuge grassland in its appearance, especially where it is grazed, as is often the case. Transitions of this kind may also involve the local occurrence of patches of the Carex-Cladonia community on areas of open but compacted sand and, where ericoids gain a hold, there can be stands of Calluna-Carex heath. All these different kinds of zonations may be inter-rupted by the occurrence of slack vegetation where theground water table comes sufficiently close to the surface between the dunes to keep the sand permanently moist or at least seasonally flooded. On more calcareous sands, the Salix-Holcus community often occurs around the slack edges, with drier kinds of Potentilla-Carex vegeta-tion on substrates that are less base-rich but, in both cases, boundaries are usually much sharper where the Ammophila-Festuca community occurs over the sur-rounding dune slopes, than where the Festuca-Galium vegetation provides the context. F. rubra often maintains some representation in the slacks, with herbs like Lotuscorniculatus, Ranunculus acris, Trifolium repens and Euphrasia officinalis variously recorded, but Ammophila disappears sharply at the slack surrounds and plants such as Poa pratensis and Car ex arenaria sometimes pen-etrate little further. Distribution "