"sd8","Zonation and succession Where wind-blown sand has become stabilised over the surface of raised beaches, low shelves of rock or terraces of superficials set back but a little way from the shore, the Festuca-Galium community can occupy the first veg-etated zone behind the beach top or cliffs. In more exten-sive dune systems, however, it typically occurs on older ridges or plains inland from tracts of somewhat more mobile sand, on which it is generally replaced byAmmophila-Festuca vegetation. There, with continuing modest accretion, Ammophila is more consistently prominent, retaining some vigour and holding its own against the smaller rhizomatous grasses, with more spo-radic representation of the range of perennial herbs that only become really common as the surface is finally fixed. Often, though, the two communities intergrade, the boundaries between them depending on the varying proportions of marram and F rubra, and the differing frequencies of associates such as G verum, L. cornicula-tus, P lanceolata, C.fontanum, T. repens, H. radicata and Figure 13. Vegetation pattern in the machair landscape of the Outer Isles. The dune system is fronted by narrow zones of SD2 Honkenya-Cakile and SD4 Elymusfarctus vegetation and the SD7 Ammophila-Festuca community. Behind, the sand-plain has extensive areas of various kinds of SD8 Festuca-Galium grassland with scattered fields cultivated for oats and rye or potatoes or reverting as fallow to MG11 Festuca-Agrostis-Potentilla grassland. Behind large MG7 Lolium leys, are fields with mosaics of MG10 Holco-Juncetum, MG13 Agrostis-Alopecurus grassland and M28 Filipendulo-Iridetum, interspersed with purer stands of the last. (Redrawn from Dargie 1998, by permission of Scottish Natural Heritage). SD2 & SD4 SD7 SD8 MG10,MG13 & M28 mosaics M28 reedswamp oats, rye or potatoes MG7 buildings & gardens https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.042 Published online by Cambridge University Press180 Shingle, strandline and sand-dune communities Taraxacum. Around our southern coasts, the usual tran-sition is from the Ononis sub-community of Ammophila-Festuca vegetation to the Typical or, more locally, the Luzula or Tortula sub-communities of the Festuca-Galium vegetation. Towards the north-west of Britain where, on the machair, stretches of stabilised sand are especially extensive, these generally carry the Bellis-Ranunculus or Prunella sub-communities, passing onyounger dunes to Typical Ammophila-Festuca vegeta-tion. Particularly in southern Britain, locally bare areas within the Festuca-Galium Community often have patches of the Tortulo-Phleetum. With more abrupt transitions to areas of highly mobile sand, as where severe erosion has been precipitated among stable dunes following surface disturbance of some kind, stretches of Festuca-Galium vegetation can be punctuated by stands of the Ammophila community, where rejuvenated marram may be accompanied by little else at first among the shifting substrate. Or, where sand eventually settles in and around such blow-outs, the Carex arenaria com-munity may develop, sharply marked off from the sur-rounding Festuca-Galium swards or grading to them as tillers of F. rubra and Ammophila spread in among the sedge. Over fixed dunes where there is some variation in base-richness of the sand surface, the Festuca-Galium com-munity is often accompanied by other swards, the zonations between the vegetation types being especially gradual where, as is frequently the case, grazing by stock or rabbits helps keep all the herbage short and diverse. Sometimes, it is the varied intensity of leaching of what seem to be fairly uniform sands that has produced differ-ences in surface pH, but very commonly such patterns are influenced by contrasts in the lime-content of the wind-blown sediments, something which is usually dependent on the proportion of shell fragments to sili-ceous material. With a shift on to more acid sands, where the pH can fall from near 8 down to 5 or less, the Festuca-Galium community is often replaced by the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland. There, marram remains similarly moribund but F rubra is generally accompa-nied and sometimes replaced by F ovina and, along with frequent and often abundant C arenaria, there is com-monly some Agrostis capillaris and Anthoxanthum, grasses which make only an occasional contribution tothe Festuca-Galium community. Herbs such as G verum, L. corniculatus, C. fontanum, T repens and Campanula rotundifolia can remain fairly frequent, but Galium saxa-tile now becomes very common and, among the mosses, Dicranum scoparium, Hylocomium splendens and Pleu-rozium schreberi accompany Rhytidiadelphus squarrosus and Pseudoscleropodium purum. Generally, then, the sward has the look of a Nardo-Galion community rather than some kind of mesotrophic grasslandalthough, again, transitions can be gradual, particularly where the Luzula sub-community of Festuca-Galium grassland passes to the Anthoxanthum sub-community of the Carex-Festuca-Agrostis vegetation, a zonation that is especially common in dune systems down theeastern Scottish and Northumberland coasts. In some places, such patterns are further complicated by the occurrence on compacted sand, or on sand-shingle mix-tures, of the Carex-Cornicularia community, where the turf is much more open and where lichens such as Cor-nicularia aculeata, Cladonia arbuscula, C. foliacea, C. impexa, C furcata and Cfimbriata are a very prominent feature. Transitions from the Festuca-Galium community to more obviously calcicolous swards are much more local, but they can be seen where shell-sand has been deposited over exposures of limestone or calcareous drift with rendziniform soils. Along parts of the south Wales coast, for example, Carboniferous Limestone underlies some stretches of fixed dune, and in a few places the Tortula sub-community of Festuca-Galium vegetation passes to Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland with the shift on to sandy rendzinas. Ammophila, C arenaria and F rubra largely disappear with this transition but among a grassy turf of F ovina and K. macrantha, plants like T praecox, H. pilosella and S. acre provide some continu-ity, together with H. lutescens and P. purum in what is often an extensive moss layer. Far to the north, where wind-blown sand has been deposited among exposures of Durness Limestone along the Sutherland coast, com-parable zonations can be seen very locally between the Be His-Ranunculus and Prunella types of Festuca-Galium grassland and the Dryas-Carex heath. Again, Festuca-Galium grassland and the Dryas-Carex heath. Again, Ammophila and C. arenaria drop out, while plants like Dryas octopetala, Carex flacca, C panicea, Plantago maritima and Antennaria dioica become very common, but L. corniculatus, B. perennis, G verum, K. macrantha, T. praecox, H. pilosella and Homalothecium lutescens continue to give character to many stands of the heath and some fine mosaics of the vegetation types have ill-defined boundaries. The other important kind of edaphic variation that influences vegetation patterns on the fixed sands where the Festuca-Galium community occurs is related to the height of the ground water table. In depressions among undulating sand-plains or between ridges of immobile dunes, this can come close to the surface, keeping the ground very moist or waterlogged through much of theyear, or even giving some flooding in winter. Then, the Festuca-Galium swards typically give way to some kind of slack vegetation, usually around the drier margins of more base-rich slacks, of the Salix-Holcus type. That community is quite varied, but some of the more mois-ture-tolerant plants of the Festuca-Galium vegetation https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.042 Published online by Cambridge University PressSD8 Festuca rubra-Galium verum fixed dune grassland 181 can run on into slacks with some frequency, F. rubra, H lanatus, C. arenaria, L. corniculatus, T. repens, Euphrasia officinalis agg. and Prunella commonly making a contri-bution to the sward. With the appearance of Salix repens, however, and such associates as Epipactis palus-tris, Car ex panicea and Hydro cotyle vulgar is, together with varied suites of other herbs and bryophytes, there is often little difficulty in discerning boundaries between the vegetation types, especially where sudden transitionsto wetter ground occur among dunes in drier parts of the country with Typical Festuca-Galium forming the usual slack surround. In the wetter north-west of Britain, and particularly over the gently rolling sand-plains of the machair, the zonations can be less well defined because more moisture-demanding herbs extend further into theFestuca-Galium community and the slack vegetation tends not to be so strictly confined to lower depressions. Here, then, stretches of the more mesophytic Bellis-Ranunculus and Prunella sub-communities often pass more gradually into Salix-Holcus vegetation, sometimes with an intervening zone of the Festuca-Agrostis-Poten-tilla grassland. Wetter slacks then see a transition to the Salix-Colliergon or Salix-Campy Hum community. Where transitions to wetter ground also involve a reduc-tion in the base-richness of the substrate, as with a shift on to moist acid sands, the Potentilla-Carex slack replaces the Salix-Holcus and these other communitiesin such sequences. There, it is the presence of mixtures of P. anserina, C. nigra, S. repens, Galium palustre, Ranun-culus flammula and Cardamine pratensis that distinguish the damp swards, giving the look of a poor fen. With the increased stability of the surface among fixed dunes, and the more hospitable nutrient and moisture regimes beneath the Festuca-Galium vegetation, there are enhanced possibilities of serai progression to scrub or woodland. Very commonly, though, such succession is held in check by the grazing of stock or rabbits, so that the community is maintained as a plagioclimax. Where there is some relief from the predations of herbivores, Festuca-Galium swards can grow more rank, grasses such as F. rubra, H lanatus and Dactylis taking on a more tussocky appearance, and herbs like Heracleum, Centaurea nigra and Daucus carota growing up tall from their basal rosettes, producing something like a Centau-reo-Cynosuretum. More locally, but especially along the north-east coast of England, the Ammophila-Arrhen-atherum community can occur among Festuca-Galium vegetation where there is little or no grazing. Here, F rubra and Ammophila can both persist in some quantity, with P. pratensis, H lanatus, A. millefolium, G. verum and L. corniculatus also often present, but Arrhenath-erum is a very common and sometimes abundantfeature, with frequent Dactylis, Veronica chamaedrys and Heracleum confirming the character of an Arrhena-therion sward. On warmer dune slopes, the additionalpresence of Geranium sanguineum and patches of Rosa pimpinellifolia can mark out such transitions even more strikingly. Continued freedom from grazing can allow the inva-sion of Rubusfruticosus agg. among the Festuca-Galiumgrassland producing patches of Rubus-Holcus under-scrub, with rank growth of F. rubra, P. pratensis, H lanatus, Dactylis, Arrhenatherum and umbellifers around the bramble, or bracken may spread in stands of Pteridium-Rubus vegetation. In other cases, the removal or demise of herbivores has allowed the direct invasion of trees, birch frequently figuring prominently in such successions, with conifers sometimes seeding in from nearby plantations. Where reduction of grazing has taken place on patchworks of Festuca-Galium grassland and Carex-Festuca-Agrostis swards on more acid sands, rank derivatives of the former often persist among some kind of Calluna-Carex heath, where mixtures of Calluna vulgaris with Erica cinerea or Empetrum nigrum ssp. nigrum are characteristically dominant among calcifuge herbs, bryophytes and lichens. Landward patterns among stretches of Festuca-Galium vegetation are often further confused by various kinds of dune reclamation or improvement. Sometimes,but a small zone of natural fixed dune persists as a fringeto a golf course, on which the Festuca-Galium swards may survive only in a modified form in periodically mown rough, or to pasture where the community has been entirely replaced by sown Lolio-Cynosuretum or Lolio-Plantaginion leys. More strikingly, on the machair, Festuca-Galium grassland can be seen among extensive patchworks of rotational arable land, havingescaped cultivation or being in various stages of rever-sion after short periods under the plough. Finally, on many dune systems, stands of the community give way abruptly to conifer plantations established on the stable sand. Distribution "