"sd9","Zonation and succession The Ammophila-Arrhenatherum grassland is usually found as a local replacement for other swards on more stabilised calcareous dunes, occurring in zonations and mosaics which are presumably influenced, at least in part, by variations in grazing intensity. In many places, the community could probably progress very readily to scrub with the invasion of shrubs and trees, or to bracken, and stands are sometimes found among thesekinds of vegetation. In the generalised sequence of communities on British dunes, the Ammophila-Arrhenatherum grassland gener-ally occurs where more mature Ammophila-Festuca swards or Festuca-Galium vegetation would otherwise be found and, on more varied systems, it often grades tothese. Compared with the former community, the most obvious differences can be the abundance of Arrhenath-erum and, particularly with the shift to younger duneridges, Typical Ammophila-Arrhenatherum grassland may pass quite gradually to the Ononis sub-community of Ammophila-Festuca vegetation with changes in domi-nance of the grasses. Commonly, however, neighbouring Ammophila-Festuca swards on more fixed sands have a greater variety and abundance of smaller herbs andbryophytes, with species such as Hypochoeris radicata, Taraxacum officinale agg.; Leontodon taraxacoides, Hieracium pilosella, Brachythecium albicans, Tortula ruralis ssp. ruraliformis and Hypnum cupressiforme becoming important. With the move to more heavilygrazed stretches of stabilised dunes, some of these same plants make a frequent appearance where theAmmophila-Arrhenatherum grassland gives way to Festuca-Galium vegetation. In transitions to the Luzula sub-community of that kind of grassland, for example, a common vegetation type on Northumbrian dunes, the decline in Arrhenatherum is accompanied by a rise in their frequency along with small tussock grasses likeKoeleria, Agrostis capillaris, Anthoxanthum and Festuca ovina among the grazed down F. rubra, P. pratensis, C. arenaria and L. campestris. Where more acidic sands occur, this zonation can continue into stands of Carex-Festuca-Agrostis grassland. Alternatively, the Ammophila-Arrhenatherum com-munity can pass to Typical Festuca-Galium vegetation where the occasional occurrence of Arrhenatherum, Dactylis, Heracleum and Cirsium arvense, with frequent Achillea and S. Jacobaea in sometimes rough F. rubra-dominated swards, can give a greater measure of conti-nuity to the zonation. Mixtures of these two communities can also be found among patches of scrubby vegetation on less heavily grazed dunes. There, the Ammophila-Arrhenatherum grassland can give way to clumps of Rubus-Holcus underscrub, the grassy margins of which, with rank H. lanatus, Arrhenatherum and Dactylis, umbellifers and tall weedy herbs, have much in common with the surrounding dune swards (Figure 14). Or, where bracken invades along with the bramble, there may be transitions to Pteridium-Rubus underscrub. In other cases, particularly on some of the Humber dune systems, Hippophae rhamnoides scrub can be found among Ammophila-Arrhenatherum grassland, Festuca rubra and Ammophila tending to persist most prominently in the Typical sub-community, Arrhenath-erum remaining common, often among nitrophilous weeds, in the Urtica-Galium sub-community. Or there can be zonations to Ligustrum vw/gare-dominated stands of the Crataegus-Hedera scrub or grassy Prunus-Rubus scrub. Distribution "