"sm13","Zonation and succession Where the Puccinellietum is a pioneer community, as on sandier substrates, it appears to establish itself mainly by the rooting of vegetative fragments of P. maritima uprooted from existing swards by grazing stock and carried by tides (Ranwell 1961, Brereton 1971, Adam 1976, Gray & Scott 1977a). P. maritima can set abundant seed (Gray & Scott 1911 a) but it has no special dispersal mechanism and, though caryopses can be washed away, seedling establishment in the pioneer zone seems uncommon. Once established, the scattered plants produce numer-ous radiating stolons and accrete sediment into a series of hummocks (see Plate 3 in Ranwell 1972). Hummock size varies from shore to shore: some hummocks never exceed 50 cm in height but others are taller and attain a diameter of several metres. The hummock tops may carry the transitional Puccinellia-Salicornia-Suaeda community. Yapp & Johns (1917) postulated that the intervening hollows developed into pans but Pethwick (1974) showed that such a model could not account for the majority of upper-marsh pans. At some sites a narrow zone of very scattered hum-mocks gives way quickly to a continuous sward of the Puccinellia-dominditQd sub-community. In other cases the hummocky topography persists much higher upshore (see the striking photographs in Yapp & Johns 1917) and eventually passes to fairly smooth swards of some Puccinellietum vegetation or, in the mid-and upper marsh, to Juncetum gerardi which is the usual high level vegetation of the grazed marshes of the westcoast (Figure 8). On ungrazed west coast sites, theLimonium-Armeria sub-community may occur in the upper marsh. In the south-east, the Puccinellietum is rarely a pioneer community. Its position in the zonation varies, the Puccinellia-dominaXQd sub-community appearing either below or above the Halimionetum portulacoidis. In this region, the Puccinellietum can be found right up to the tidal limit, either as the Puccinellia-dominatGd sub-community, as around The Wash, or as the verycharacteristic high marsh Limonium-Armeria sub-com-munity. In the upper reaches of estuaries, where the soil salinity in the lower marsh is kept constantly low by freshwater dilution, an inversion of the normal zona-tion may be found with the Puccinellietum in upper marsh depressions where evaporation produces high salinities (Gillham 1957a, Adam 1976). Disturbance of upper marsh sites frequently results in the association appearing as a secondary pioneer, especially in the form of the Puccinellia-Glaux sub-community (cf. Beeftink 1962). In the loch-head sites where the Puccinellia-turf fucoid sub-community is characteristic, it is frequentlythe lowest vegetation but it seems only rarely to be actively expanding. To seaward, there is usually a very low cliff or the vegetation cover is discontinuous withdiscrete patches on isolated rock or gravel plinths. Distribution "