"sm16","Zonation and succession In general, the Juncetum gerardi occupies a position above the Puccinellietum maritimae in the salt-marsh zonation but the extent of the Juncetum in the south-east differs strikingly from its contribution to salt-marsheselsewhere. In the south-east, the association is of very limited extent and occurs only at high levels in the marsh, most often forming a discontinuous zone in contact with the Limonium-Armeria sub-community of the Puccinellietum. In the north and west, the Juncetum is usually very extensive in both the mid-and upper-marsh. The exact reasons for this difference, and for the more seaward extension of particular species in the west, are unknown (Beeftink 1977a, b, Adam 1978) but the major factor controlling the relative positions of the two associations is the degee of submersion. In upper estuar-ies, where there is freshwater dilution, the positions of the Juncetum and Puccinellietum are reversed. The loca-tion and nature of the junction between the associationsis also affected markedly by the extent and nature of the grazing. Within the Juncetum, there is usually a zonation of the different sub-communities in relation to their tolerance of submersion. The detailed pattern varies from site to site and, though the Festuca-Glaux sub-community usually gives way to the Leontodon sub-community up-marsh, the relative depth of the zones is very variable (Figure 9). In some cases, there is a complex mosaic of the two communities over the mid-marsh. The Leonto-don sub-community may, in turn, pass into the Carex flacca sub-community. Provided that the upper limit of the salt-marsh is not an artificial boundary, the topmost zone grades into non-maritime grassland or mire (e.g. Gillham 1957Z?). The tall Festuca rubra sub-community often forms part of zonations with the Halimionetum, sometimes occupying a position between this associa-tion and fragmentary stands of the Artemisietum. The zonation of the sub-communities may represent a successional sequence in response to substrate accretion and the gradual raising of salt-marsh surfaces. Grazing too, can, be responsible for considerable temporal changes within the Juncetum gerardi (see above) and may shift the succession towards the development of otherassociations. Very heavy grazing, particularly by cattleand horses on clay and silt substrates, can lead to poach-ing and the appearance of Puccinellietum maritimae or to communities characteristic of disturbed saline sites such as the Puccinellietum distantis and the Agrostis stolonifera-Alopecurus geniculatus community. Turf-cutting opens up areas for colonisation by a variety of species. In the early stages a variety of annuals and short-lived perennials predominate: Spergularia marina, Juncus bufonius, Plantago coronopus and Sagina maritima, for example, often with Pottia heimii. Diverse assemblages of such species have sometimes been clas-sified within the Saginetea. Puccinellia maritima is fre-quently an early colonist and a closed Puccinellietum maritimae may develop. P maritima may persist within a Festuca rubra sward to produce a patchwork of the tran-sitional vegetation of the Puccinellia sub-community of the Juncetum gerardi. It is this pattern of recolonisation which helps make grazing and turf-cutting compatible activities on the same salt-marsh. Distribution "