"sm6","Zonation and succession S. x townsendii was first noticed around Southampton Water in the 1870s and is presumed to be a natural hybrid between the native Spartina maritima and theintroduced S. alterniflora (Marchant 1967). Its slow natural spread was quickly overtaken by the much more vigorous fertile amphidiploid S. anglica which, in the 20 years after its first appearance in Southampton Water and The Solent probably around 1890, had colonisedevery estuary and salt-marsh between Chichester andPoole (see, for example, Goodman et al. 1959, 1969,Hubbard 1965, Ranwell 1967, Hubbard & Stebbings 1967). Widespread planting for reclamation after 1910 extended the distribution of S. anglica in Britain and natural spread from these centres has filled many gaps. S. x townsendii appears to have been transmitted to a number of scattered localities by inclusion of sterile material in transplant consignments but this species probably accounted for less than 20 ha out of a total of over 12000 ha of marsh dominated by S. townsendii s. I in Great Britain at the last detailed survey (Hubbard & Stebbings 1967). Once established, the plants perennate and reproduce naturally by rhizome fragmentation, especially wherethe tidal run is fast, as at Bridgwater Bay (Ranwell 1964a) and, in the case of S. anglica, by seed, the set of which is regular though variable in quantity (Goodman et al. 1969). Spread from such fragments or seedlings can be rapid in S. anglica with clonal patches expanding and coalescing into clumps and then closing to a sward; in other cases discrete patches may persist for long periods.In many places S. anglica has become established on previously bare substrates and initiated the development of new marshes. Accretion of material has been found to vary between 0.5 and 10 cm/year (Ranwell 1964a, Bird & Ranwell 1964); at the higher rates something like 500 cm/ha/year of material is deposited. Accretion rate may depend on local climate, the tidal pattern and perhapsthe seasonal microflora (Ranwell 1964a) and the subse-quent marsh drainage pattern may be influenced by the slope, tidal range and substrate type (Braybrooks & J. M. Lambert, unpublished). Accretion eventually raises the marsh surface to a level at which other speciescan theoretically compete with the S. anglica but, although species from Puccinellietum maritimae and Juncetum gerardi communities occur occasionallywithin swards, they are never particularly abundant andcompetition with the tall and vigorous S. anglica may prevent overtopping and the replacement of the commu-nity. Litter accumulation or frost action (Hubbard & Stebbings 1967, Ranwell 1972) and grazing (Ranwell 1961, Goodman et al. 1969) may initiate the opening up of the S. anglica sward and allow the spread of Puccinel-lia maritima. On the higher parts of ungrazed marshes there is evi-dence of invasion by a variety of plants. At Bridgwater Bay, a short-period sub-seral alternation of S. anglica and A triplex hastata has been observed on accumulated drift with sand (Ranwell 1961, 19646). A. hastata hasalso invaded the upper part of a S. anglica marsh at Lytham on the Ribble estuary. At Keysworth in PooleHarbour, Elymus pycnanthus has invaded (Hubbard & Stebbings 1968). There and at Bridgwater, Scirpus marit-imus and Phragmites australis have also appeared at higher levels and replaced about 50% of the S. anglica sward in 12 years. Ranwell (1972) has suggested that such a process is favoured by the development of less saline conditions consequent upon land-drainage seepage but this has not been widely investigated. Halim-ione portulacoides can establish itself along creek margins within S. anglica marshes (Goodman et al. 1959). S. anglica has also become established on existing marshes. Invasion of Zostera noltii swards has been recorded on the south and east coasts (Goodman et al. 1959; Bird & Ranwell 1964; Hubbard & Stebbings 1968) and Chapman (1959) mapped such a process in North Cockle Bight at Scolt Head between 1932 and 1959. At that site, Z. angustifolia on very soft mud was not invaded; neither is there any evidence that S. anglica has anywhere replaced Z. marina which occurs at lower levels than Z. noltii. At Keysworth in Poole Harbour, a Ruppia maritima-Potamogeton pectinatus community has been replaced by S. anglica (Hubbard & Stebbings 1968). S. anglica can flourish at the same level as the Sali-cornietum europaeae and, as a result, pioneer vegetation https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541834.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressSM6 Spartinetum townsendii salt-marsh 41 of this kind is now of local occurrence throughout south-east England. The extent to which S. anglica invades other existing marsh communities is uncertain. Pans and creeks invegetation higher up the marsh may be grown over and scattered plants are widespread throughout marshes, but the wholesale replacement of other communities isnot well documented. Chater & Jones (1957) provide some evidence for a slow advance into Puccinellietum maritimae and Juncetum gerardi in the Dovey estuary but this is not apparent at many sites. Similarly there islittle evidence as to how much invasion into S. anglica swards takes place from contiguous communities. On grazed marshes in the Dovey, creek levees have becomecolonised by Festuca rubra which has eventually ousted S. anglica; because of the frequency of creeks there, the total area of marsh affected is considerable (Chater 1973). Heavily grazed and poached upper levels of S. anglica have elsewhere been invaded by Puccinellia maritima. It is not known how far the development of a S. anglica community to seaward of an existing marsh complex affects the overall nature of the marsh but it might be expected that alterations in drainage would be of prime importance. In general, S. anglica has consolidated its early initial spread but the patchy degeneration of sward which became known as 'die-back' was noticed as early as 1928 and in some sites has made a considerable impression. It is still mainly restricted to Channel coast marshes and its exact cause remains unknown. Pathogens and pollutionhave been ruled out (Goodman et al. 1959) and it seems possible that the process is caused by a toxic reduced inorganic ion (perhaps sulphide) produced in anaerobic waterlogged root environments (Goodman & Williams 1961). Alternatively, the switch from accretion to abla-tion under S. anglica may be responsible for its demise. Distribution "