"u1","Zonation and succession The Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland usually survives now as fragments among mosaics of sub-shrub vegetation, bracken, scrub and woodland on lowland heaths where, after often long and complex treatment histories, response to neglect is generally the major factor in determining the pattern of communities. In other places, reclamation of such landscapes has been so complete as to leave small stands of the grassland isolated on more intractable or temporarily disturbed ground among intensive pasture, arable or forestry plantations, with some kinds of urban wasteland providing new habitats in a totally artificial context. All the more valuable, then, are those places where the community persists as a fairly extensive element of open, semi-natural scenery, as in parts of Breckland where there is the added interest of wide variation in soil conditions. Even in this most continental environment, the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland is largely a plagioclimax community ultimately dependent on grazing for its survival. In this light, the community can be regarded as the usual product of clearance and long-continued pasturing over parched, acid soils through the drier lowlands of Britain, where it has been closely associated with heath vegetation, grazing and burning maintaining the characteristic patchwork of communities. The particular kinds of heath with which the Festuca-Agrostis- Rumex grassland is still found are, however, quite diverse, its own distribution spanning the ranges of a variety of distinct sub-shrub communities. Through its heartland, in East Anglia, it characteristically occurs with the Calluna-Festuca heath in the extensive grassheath mosaics of Breckland and the Suffolk Sandlings and among the drier vegetation of the Norfolk Commons; here the Typical, Erodium-Teesdalia and Cornicularia-Cladonia sub-communities come espe cially close to the heath in their floristics. Further south, on the commons of the wetter Weald, the Potentilla- Galium sub-community becomes frequent and its usual sub-shrub companion is the Calluna-Ulex minor heath; and then, in the South-West Peninsula, along the Welsh coast, up the Marches and around the south-western Pennine fringes, this is replaced by the Calluna-Ulex gallii heath, a community which recurs in close association with the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland at scattered localities around the East Anglian coast. The Hypochoeris sub-community is also found with the Calluna- Ulex gallii heath in some of its cliff-top stations around the south-western seaboard, where the sub shrub vegetation is often of the Scilla sub-community. Such situations are scarcely maritime in the strict sense and, where there is any salt-spray influence, the Festuca- Agrostis-Rumex grassland is replaced by the Armeria- Cerastium maritime therophyte community. All these sub-shrub communities are dry heaths and the various kinds of Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland essentially represent their herbaceous element, in which the ericoids and gorse species are kept in check by the continual predation of herbivores. The proportions of grassland and heath at any site, and the sharpness of the boundaries between the vegetation types, are thus ulti mately dependent upon the disposition and intensity of the grazing, with burning episodes offering periodic opportunities for the grassland to gain ascendancy over the heath on shallower soils where pasturing after the fire is heavy. Even then, however, the parched and impoverished character of the ground prevents the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland developing the kind of vigorous post-burn sward that is produced over moister soils in central southern and south-western heaths by Agrostis curtisii. Except in very extreme situations, the continuing open nature of the vegetation means that, if grazing and burning cease, colonisation by woody plants tolerant of the dry and oligotrophic conditions readily occurs. With the almost universal abandonment of traditional heath management, then, and after the demise of rabbits, the contribution of the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland has generally shrunk, with a spread of heath and direct invasion of the sward by Betula pendula and pines, these latter able to seed in from nearby plantations, with Quercus robur sometimes appearing or, more locally, as at Sandringham Warren, Rhododendronponticum. Even where the shade is not too dense, the grassland species mostly succumb quite quickly and there is little doubt that most stands of the community would progress eventually to Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland, the climax forest of acid and free-draining soils through lowland Britain and variously dominated by oak, birch or pine. The other very common element of the neg lected heath landscape is bracken, although Pteridium aquilinum tends to avoid soils subject to pronounced parching and to make little headway in direct expansion into the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland. Typically, then, the community now persists mainly on patches of more inhospitable ground where invaders cannot flourish, along pathways and around trampled picnic spots and viewing points among dense patchworks of rank heath, bracken and woodland. Periodic disturbance may allow a resurgence of the Festuca- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.036 Published online by Cambridge University PressUl Festuca ovina-Agrostis capillaris-Rumex acetosella grassland 309 Agrostis-Rumex grassland but, where the ground becomes enriched, such places are likely to be directly invaded by Ulex europaeus to form Ulex-Rubus scrub, or by brambles to produce Rubus-Holcus or Pteridium- Rubus underscrub, or by rank grasses and tall herbs, all of which shade out the smaller plants of the grassland. Towards the wetter part of its range, it is often among such vegetation types as these that the Festuca-Agrostis- Rumex grassland persists in rocky field corners and in the disturbed ground around settlements, forming part of the untidy patchwork of semi-natural vegetation typical of landscapes which have seen marginal improvement for grazing. Through the drier lowlands, reclamation has been more extensive and drastic, though it often came late because of the inherent diffi culties which the soils pose for good cropping, being lime-and often copper-deficient, droughty and liable to wind erosion. But they are readily cultivated and, par ticularly in East Anglia, have often gone to arable, mostly for sugar-beet and barley (Hodge et al. 1984). Afforestation has also been an attractive alternative where agricultural yields are low and, in the first 30 years of its existence, the Forestry Commission had acquired 40% of Breckland where by far the largest and most interesting stands of the community survived. There, then, the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland often remains as fragments on the wider sandy ridges between plantations of pine, or in the corners of ploughed fields which have escaped planting and treatment with chemical fertilisers and herbicides. Stands taken in to airfields and military training grounds sometimes preserve more extensive and semi-natural zonations and mosaics by virtue of the prohibition on such improving activities, and the community can develop over a surprising range of man-made surfaces there. Within urban or industrial areas, too, in the warm dry lowlands, the Festuca- Agrostis-Rumex grassland can occur over sharply- draining derelict ground among a wide variety of more eutrophic grasslands, tall-herb vegetation and scrub. Where the most extensive stands of the community remain, in parts of Breckland, there is the additional striking influence of variations in base-richness among the sharply-draining, impoverished soils depending on the proximity to the surface of the underlying Chalk and the amount of calcareous material among the superfi- cials (Figure 31). Such differences exert the major control over the renowned suite of grass-heaths, first fully described by Watt (1936,1940), and grouped in this scheme within the Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland (Watt ’s A and B swards) and the Festuca-Agrostis- Rumex grassland (D-G). The zonations, which can be seen still in whole or part, on the Lakenheath-Elveden, Icklingham and Stanford-Wretham heaths (Ratcliffe 1977), run from the most calcifuge swards on Redlodge humo-ferric podzols, through transitions over Worl- ington and Methwold sands, to the most calcicole on Newmarket brown rendzinas (Corbett 1973, Hodge et al. 1984). Where Calluna-Festuca heath occupies the more acidic profiles, its boundaries are generally very obvious but zonations among the grasslands can be very gradual or form complex mosaics, often depending directly on heterogeneity in the superficials; where graz ing has been relaxed, the boundaries often become further blurred by expansion throughout of F. ovina. Even in the close-cropped swards, some of the perennials and many of the ephemerals and cryptogams run throughout but the preference of Thymus praecox, T. pulegioides, Leontodon hispidus, Cirsium acaule, Sanguisorba minor, Avenula pratensis and, less obviously, Koe leria macrantha, is for the Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland; and that of Rumex acetosella, Teesdalia and Galium saxatile is for the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland. In some Breckland sites, too, Carex arenaria can become prominent among these mosaics, marking a shift to Carex or Car ex-Cladonia dune communities where sand has been eroded and re-deposited (Watt 1937, Noble 1982), with some possibility of redevelop-Figure 31. Breckland grass-heaths in relation to soils and treatments. CG7a Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland, Koeleria sub-community CG7b Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland, Cladonia sub-community CG7c Festuca-Hieracium-Thymus grassland, Ditrichum-Diploschistes sub-community U1 a Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland, Cornicularia-Cladonia sub-community Ulb Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland, Typical sub-community Ulc Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland, Erodium- Teesdalia sub-community CG7a lighter grazing heavier grazing surface disturbance Newmarket brown rendzinasRedlodge humo-ferric podzols https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.036 Published online by Cambridge University Press310 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities ment of the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland over stabilised surfaces (Watt 1938). Similar zonations can be seen at scattered localities around the East Anglian coast, too. Distribution "