"u10","Zonation and succession The Carex-Racomitrium community often terminates altitudinal sequences of sub-shrub heaths and various kinds of chionophilous vegetation disposed over slopes and summits in relation to exposure to wind and cold. Flushing with snow-melt or spring waters can result in transitions to dwarf-herb communities or soligenous mires, and on some high-level plateaus the moss-heath grades to blanket bog over thickening ombrogenous peat. Increasingly, towards the less oceanic parts of eastern Scotland, the various elements in these patterns are replaced by their continental equivalents, and to wards lower altitudes there is a strong tendency for the vegetation types to be influenced by grazing. In the typical oceanic sequence of low-and middle- alpine heaths, well seen over the long quartzite ridge of Foinaven in the north-west Highlands, where each of the communities descends to particularly low levels, the striking feature is the abundance of R. lanuginosum throughout the zonation. Over the summit, the Carex- Racomitrium heath can be found in its most fragmentary form on the stony ablation surfaces, but this thickens up to more extensive tracts of the Silene sub-community with a little shelter, and this in turn gives way below to a zone of the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath. There is frequently strong floristic continuity between the vege tation types, particularly in those places where the Carex-Racomitrium heath loses some of its contingent of cushion herbs and becomes more like the Typical form, and where, as is usual over more windswept slopes, the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath is represented by the more lichen-rich Cetraria sub-community. Then, species such as C. bigelowii, F. ovinalvivipara, D. flex uosa, Cladonia uncialis, C. arbuscula and Cetraria islandica occur often throughout and, although V. myrtillus and, more distinctly, Empetrum nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum increase in frequency and abundance eventually becoming co-dominant with R. lanuginosum, this development may be at first very ill-defined. Among the lower reaches of the Carex-Racomitrium heath, for example, the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath can occur in small patches over stretches of block scree or in shallow hollows, looking very much like a sub-shrub facies of the moss-heath (Poore & McVean 1957). In other places, a more sudden shift on to steeper, bouldery ground can be matched by a clearer boundary between the vegetation types. On Foinaven and some other mountains in the northwest Highlands, as over the Affric-Cannich Hills, the broad altitudinal zonation continues downwards with the replacement of the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath by its heather-dominated equivalent, the Calluna-Racomitrium heath. In other places, as on the western half of the Creag Liath ridge on Ben More Assynt, this latter community passes more directly to the Carex-Racomi- trium heath: again, the transition can be fairly gradual, but Calluna is typically unable to survive at the higher altitudes of the moss-heath and such species as C. bigelowii and Diphasium alpinum become increasingly frequent above. A further complication of this pattern is seen where the Calluna-Arctostaphylos alpinus heath occupies some of the more windswept slopes below the Carex-Racomitrium heath, as on high spurs in the Fannich Hills, but with its wind-clipped mat of A. alpinus and Loiseleuria procumbens, among Calluna, V. myrtillus and E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum such vege tation is usually very distinct. With the geographical shift eastwards, the competitive ability of R. lanuginosum in these zonations becomes increasingly curtailed, especially over more severely exposed slopes through the low-and middle-alpine zones, where less oceanic heaths, usually with an abundance of lichens, replace their western equivalents. And, away from the eroded and intermittently irrigated abla tion surfaces of the north-west Highlands, the Carex- Racomitrium heath is more often of the Typical form. Good zonations, juxtaposing oceanic and continental communities, can be observed on Ben Wyvis and, in the west-central Highlands, over the Drumochter Hills, both sites with very extensive moss-heaths over their summit plateaus. Here, Typical Carex-Racomitrium heath passes below to Calluna-Cladonia heath, often through a mosaic in which fragments of each vegetation type are included within a ground of the other (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962), though with a general shift in dominance among the cryptogams from R. lanuginosum to a variety of lichens, and the appearance of wind-clipped Calluna with a little V. myrtillus and E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum. On other mountains, as over parts of the Monadhliath plateau, these latter sub-shrubs figure more prominently in the zone below the Carex-Racomi- trium heath, forming stands of the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath, in which lichens are often even more overwhelmingly abundant than in the heather-dominated counterpart. Zonations of both these types can be seen in and around the Cairngorms, too: above Glen Feshie, for example, there are some especially fine sequences of the former sort, and on the outlying spurs of White Mounth and Cairn Bannoch in Lochnagar some of the latter. Over much of the high plateaus here, though, and particularly in the eastern Cairngorms, the Carex-Racomitrium heath is replaced by the Juncus-Racomitrium heath, where the more continental character of the flora extends on to the fell-fields. The two vegetation types occur together in some places, most extensively on the summits of Lochnagar, where gentle transitions between them can be widely seen: usually a move from the Carex-Racomitrium heath to the other community involves a reduction in the abundance of R. lanugino- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.045 Published online by Cambridge University PressUlO Carex bigelowii-Racomitrium lanuginosum moss-heath 411 sum, an increase in the cover of lichens and much more frequent tussocks of Juncus trifidus. Here, the Juncus- Racomitrium heath represents the equivalent of the most open stands of the Silene sub-community of the Carex- Racomitrium heath on the western Highland ablation surfaces. Throughout its range, a frequent complication of these zonations involves the occurrence of various kinds of chionophilous vegetation wherever there is an increased tendency for snow to accumulate and persist in hollows or over slopes that have a little more shelter than is usual for the moss-heath. The widest range of snow-bed communities in our mountains is, in fact, found where the Carex-Racomitrium heath is least common and extensive, through the east-central Highlands, although stands can be found there which contain patches of the Salix-Racomitrium and Carex-Polytrichum communities, and quite a variety of more chionophilous vegetation of this sort occurs among Carex- Racomitrium heath on the summit of Aonach Mor. Such snow-beds are generally very distinct from their sur rounds, with their characteristic abundance of snow- tolerant mosses like Racomitrium heterostichum, Dicranum fuscescens, Polytrichum alpinum and Kiaeria star kei, species which are never more than local in the Carex-Racomitrium heath, but much more widespread and often less well defined are transitions to stands of the Nardus-Carex grass-heath. In that vegetation, Nardus stricta and sometimes also Scirpus cespitosus and Juncus squarrosus can be abundant on ground that is left moist as the snow melts, but there is strong floristic continuity between the communities with frequent records for C. bigelowii, D. flexuosa, G. saxatile, V. myrtillus and Cladonia uncialis, as well as R. lanuginosum which can remain quite extensive provided snow-lie is not too lengthy or irrigation very heavy. Such zonations can be seen in hollows within stretches of the moss-heath or where there is a shift to more sheltered slopes in sites like the Drumochter Hills, Beinn Dearg and Ben Wyvis, and, at lower levels, where snow-lie is not so prolonged, the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath can also figure in transitions to less exposed ground, particularly where the drainage is free and the ground more bouldery or craggy. In the north-west Highlands, the more chionophilous elements in these kinds of sequences are somewhat different. There, stretches of ground which hold snow for long periods within or adjacent to stands of the Silene sub-community often have moss-rich Deschampsia-Galium vegetation, where mixtures of Rhytidiadelphus loreus, Hylocomium splendens and Pleurozium schreberi dominate the ground carpet and where D. cespitosa becomes common, and small patches of these species on intermittently irrigated ground within the Carex-Racomitrium heath can represent the beginnings of a transition to such late snow-beds. Alternatively, over slopes flushed with melt from such fields, the more grass-rich kind of Deschampsia-Galium vegetation may replace the Silene sub-community. Over somewhat more calcareous substrates, modest flushing may bring some base-enrichment to the Silene sub-community which can presage a switch to the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia dwarf-herb vegetation. A. alpina, T. praecox, S. procumbens and C. bigelowii all remain common there, but R. lanuginosum is usually replaced by R. fasciculare or R. canescens which, with Poly tri chum alpinum and Oligotrichum hercynicum, make up the bulk of the moss carpet. Mosaics of the two communities can be seen over windswept ground on the Moine schists or limestone of the Monar Forest hills and on Ben Alder, and over Dalradian schists on Creag Mhor. Then, on Ben Lawers, a mountain which has little gentler exposed ground at high levels but where some patchy Carex-Racomitrium heath can be found, there are transitions to both the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia vege tation and, in somewhat drier situations, the Festuca- Alchemilla-Silene dwarf-herb community. On other sites, flushing of stands of Carex-Racomi- trium heath may be with more base-poor waters, when there are springs of the Philonoto-Saxifragetum or Pohl- ietum glacialis or soligenous vegetation like the Carex- Sphagnum russowii mire. These are usually clearly enough marked off from the surrounding moss-heath, although they are sometimes found as part of complexes of high-level bog vegetation within which boundaries are much less well defined. Over the summits of the Drumochter Hills, for example, and on some of the Affric-Cannich Hills, the Carex-Racomitrium heath can pass fairly gradually into the Vaccinium-Hylocomium sub-community of the Calluna-Eriophorum blanket mire with a thickening cover of ombrogenous peat. Although such plants as Eriophorum vaginatum, Rubus chamaemorus, Sphagnum capillifolium and 5. papillosum, as well as Vaccinium myrtillus, V. vitis-idaea, V. uliginosum and Empetrum nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum, characterise such vegetation, over mire margins there is sometimes strong continuity through R. lanuginosum, various lichens, C. bigelowii and D. flexuosa. Where the Carex-Racomitrium heath extends into regions of less extreme climate, as towards lower alti tudes around the western seaboard of Scotland, through the Southern Uplands and northern England, it generally occurs as the Galium sub-community in zonations which have a much less sharply alpine character than those described above. In the Moffat Hills, for example, on the Cairnsmore of Fleet and over Cross Fell, this kind of Carex-Racomitrium heath can pass below to sub shrub vegetation which approaches montane heath in its composition but which is usually some sort of Calluna- Vaccinium or Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, lichen-rich https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.045 Published online by Cambridge University Press412 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities in more exposed situations, or with an abundance of hypnaceous mosses in the more sheltered. Colder, damper aspects can have stands of the latter community which come close to chionophilous bilberry heath and locally there may be patchy Nardus-Carex heath where snow is held a little longer than usual. A further complication in these regions is that, increasingly with the shift to lower altitudes, there is a tendency for these sequences of vegetation types to be affected by grazing: this reduces the peculiar features of the different communities, encouraging a spread of grasses and grazing-tolerant dicotyledons throughout, tramples out more sensitive mosses and lichens and sometimes favours the appearance of mesophytes in response to manuring. Such a trend is already visible in the Galium sub-community and, where more ill-defined stands of this occur above zones of Nardus-Galium and Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grasslands, there seems little doubt that the whole vegetation pattern has been long affected by its use as rough pasture over unenclosed mountain slopes. Generally speaking, the Carex-Racomitrium heath is a climax community but it is probably quite vulnerable to cropping, trampling and manuring, being fairly readily converted to some kind of Vaccinium-Deschampsia grass-heath and then perhaps to Nardo-Galion grassland at more moderate altitudes. Over higher ground, ptarmigan may sometimes find palatable herbage in stretches of Carex-Racomitrium heath, but the community is otherwise little affected by biotic factors. Erosion by wind and the effects of soli fluction may help create new ground for colonisation by this kind of vegetation and it is possible that cycles of degeneration and regrowth occur in some places (Smith 19116, Tansley 1939, Pearsall 1950), but there is little actual evidence for this, and such processes may be very fragmentary and readily set back. Distribution "