"u11","Zonation and succession The Polytrichum-Kiaeria community is usually found as part of suites of chionophilous vegetation types over snow-bound slopes through the middle-alpine zone, where floristic variation can be related to duration of snow-lie, the drainage of melt-waters, the stability of the ground and the base-richness of substrates and irrigating waters. With the geographical shift northwestwards, some elements of these patterns change and the Polytrichum-Kiaeria community itself eventually peters out. The variety and extent of late snow-bed vegetation is greatest of all in the Cairngorms where this and closely- related communities are especially well developed over the north- and east-facing slopes within the transition from the more chionophilous of the Nardus-Carex swards to the wind-blasted Juncus-Racomitrium fell field of the summits. Here, hollows and slopes with long- persistent snow can have discrete patches of one or other of the Polytrichum-Kiaeria and Salix-Racomitrium com munities, mixtures of the two occurring zoned over more and less snow-bound and stable ground, or forming intimate mosaics with little apparent relation to topography. The balance in the carpet between such bryophytes as K. starkei, R. heterostichum and Gymnomitrion concinnatum often has to be relied upon to discern boundaries but, with the vagaries of climate from season to season and its sometimes unpredictable effects on the substrate, the disposition of the plants of these commu nities is not always what might be expected (Poore 1955c). And, indeed, we still have so little information about these kinds of vegetation that we remain uncertain how to interpret even the more stable patterns. The Polytrichum-Kiaeria carpets are often sodden with water after the melt, but where distinct springs issue from the snow-beds, patches of the Pohlietum glacialis or sometimes the Sphagno-Anthelietum can occur, usually clearly marked off by the abundance of their particular dominant bryophytes, the striking applegreen P. wählender gii n&v. glacialis or the great swollen masses, dull and glaucous, of A. julacea. Then, over intermittently irrigated ground fed by such permanent springs or melt-water, there can be stands of the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia dwarf-herb community. This shares with the Polytrichum-Kiaeria vegetation such species as D. cespitosa, C. bigelowii, A. alpina, Sibbaldia, O. supina, Nardus, Polytrichum alpinum and various Racomitrium ssp., but K. starkei is very scarce there and mosses in general are less abundant than in the snow-bed. Another common feature of many of these patterns in the Cairngorms is the Cryptogramma-Athyrium community, also strongly chionophilous, but characteristic of stretches of bouldery ground such as run around the steeper back of snow-beds. The abundance of ferns usually dis tinguishes such vegetation, but there is sometimes strong continuity with the Polytrichum-Kiaeria community through D. cespitosa, S. stellaris and asso ciated bryophytes (Figure 36). Figure 36. Complex of vegetation types around a late snow-bed in the Cairngorms. Polytrichum-Kiaeria snow-bed U9 Juncus-Racomitrium rush-heath U18 Crypto gramma-Athyrium fern community M32 Philonoto-Saxifragetum with M33 Pohlietum spring at its head https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.046 Published online by Cambridge University Press420 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities Surrounding these very distinctive complexes there is often some kind of Nardus-Carex heath, sometimes with an intervening zone of Carex-Polytrichum vegetation, whose extensive carpets of P. alpinum and Dicranum fuscescens can give a strong measure of structural continuity to the swards. The Nardus-Carex heath, extensive stretches of which can clothe moderately snow-bound slopes, is generally grass- or sedge-dominated, but it can provide fairly gradual transitions from the Polytrichum- Kiaeria snow-bed to sub-shrub heaths in the low-alpine zone below and to Juncus-Racomitrium fell-field above. Moving out of the Cairngorms, many elements of these sequences remain important over the highest snowy ground on other mountains through the central Highlands. In some places, later snow-bed vegetation is very well represented, while in others it is less extremely chionophilous communities that predominate and, away from the Cairngorms, the Carex-Racomitrium heath replaces the Juncus-Racomitrium heath on very exposed plateaus above the snow-beds. But good stands of Polytrichum-Kiaeria vegetation can be found with some or all of the other communities mentioned above on Lochnagar, Creag Mhor and Ben Heasgarnich, Ben Lawers, Beinn Laoigh and Ben Alder (Ratcliffe 1977). Increasingly towards the more oceanic mountains of the north-west, however, the balance among these vege tation types shifts somewhat, with the Deschampsia- Galium community becoming ever more important where there is moderately long snow-lie or pronounced irrigation by melt-water. Fragmentary stands of mossrich Deschampsia-Galium snow-beds can be seen in a few places south of the Great Glen, west of Creag Meagaidh and Ben Heasgarnich, but through the Affric-Cannich and Fannich hills and the Monar Forest, this vegetation replaces the Carex-Polytrichum heath around the margins of really late snow-patches with the Polytrichum-Kiaeria community. There are frequent records for D. cespitosa, C. bigelowii, Galium saxatile, Polytrichum alpinum and R. lanuginosum throughout these swards, but usually an obvious shift to hypnaceous mosses as dominants in the moss-carpet of the Des champsia-Galium vegetation. Also through the northwest Highlands, grassier stands of this community often extend down below the snow-beds over low-alpine slopes with either a moderate cover of snow or free through-put of melt-water and rain, frequently forming mosaics with chionophilous sub-shrub heaths over bouldery ground or peaty soils. Eventually, in the northern Highlands, the Polytrichum-Kiaeria community becomes ever more fragmentary in these complexes and around Ben More Assynt and Foinaven, it is usually mosaics of Deschampsia-Galium and Nardus-Carex vegetation that constitute the most chionophilous ele ments of the patterns. Distribution "