"u12","Zonation and succession The Salix-Racomitrium community is characteristically found with other kinds of chionophilous vegetation over the most snow-bound slopes of the middle-alpine zone, where zonations and mosaics are influenced by the length of snow-lie, the drainage conditions, solifluction and the base-richness of the substrate and irrigating waters. Moving north-westwards from the central Highlands, there are some changes in the vegetation patterns, with the Salix-Racomitrium community itself eventually disappearing. The most complete range of late snow-beds through the range of this community is to be seen over the cold and sunless north- and east-facing slopes on the lee side of the Cairngorms, within hollows and corries in the transition zone from grass- and sedge-heaths to summit fell-field. In some cases, the Salix-Racomitrium community is the most chionophilous of the range of vegetation types represented, in others it occurs with patches of Polytrichum-Kiaeria moss-heath, the latter marking out ground that is obviously influenced by longer snow-lie still, though generally free of the downwash or solifluction that are characteristic here. Then, a clear shift in dominance from Racomitrium spp. or G. concinnatum with S. herbacea to K. starkei may help to delineate the boundaries between the communities. Often, though, where both communities are represented, the patterns are not so well defined as this, nor so readily related to differences in the snow-bed environment, and the Silene-Luzula type of Salix-Racomitrium moss-heath in particular can grade imperceptibly into the Polytrichum-Kiaeria community. Mosaics are especially complex where there has been some disruption in the usual balance of conditions, with, say, a shorter or longer snow-lie than average, or some recent downwash of detritus on to an established carpet, events which are perhaps more the rule than the exception in this harsh environment (Poore 1955c, McVean & Rat cliffe 1962). The Salix-Racomitrium vegetation, and especially the Silene-Luzula sub-community, characteristically re ceives intermittent irrigation by melt-waters and downwash from rain, and, where there is a transition to less snow-bound ground which has such periodic flushing, it can pass to the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia dwarf-herb community. The two vegetation types share frequent records for such species as C. bigelowii, L. spicata, S. acaulis, Nardus, D. cespitosa, Polytrichum alpinum, R. fasciculare and R. lanuginosum, but the overall contribution from bryophytes is less in the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia community, and there it is mixtures of Alchemilla alpina, Sibbaldia and grasses which characteristically dominate. Also, where the flushing waters bring a measure of base enrichment, plants like Thymus praecox and Selaginella selaginoides make a frequent appearance over the irri gated surrounds to the snow-beds, though this is less a feature in the Cairngorms than where the Salix-Racomi- trium community occurs over more calcareous sub strates, like the Dalradian mica-schists of the Breadalbane range. There, such transitions can be seen among chionophilous swards and montane calcicolous vege tation on Ben Lawers and, more extensively, on Beinn Laoigh (Ratcliffe 1977). In other places, locally through the more northerly mountains of the central Highlands, the Salix-Racomi- trium vegetation can be found in close association with the Carex-Polytrichum heath, a less chionophilous community but one in which there is a similar abundance of mosses, usually in this case Polytrichum alpi num and/or Dicranum fuscescens. This, in turn, can grade to stretches of the Nardus-Carex grass-heath, various kinds of which form a widespread context for late snow-beds of both the Salix-Racomitrium and Poly trichum-Kiaeria communities over moderately snowbound slopes. Towards lower altitudes, the Nardus- Carex heath generally gives way to a zone of sub-shrub vegetation, within which a more mildly chionophilous influence can extend down among low-alpine communities. Above, it typically gives way over the exposed summit plateaus of the Cairngorms to the Juncus- Racomitrium fell-field, among which small patches of the Salix-Racomitrium community can survive wherever there is sufficient shelter to catch and hold a little snow for long periods. Particularly distinctive here are the stands of the Gymnomitrion sub-community which occur within the depressed centres of Juncus trifidus tussocks. Even within the east-central Highlands, there is a tendency away from the very bleak tops of the Cairngorms for the Juncus-Racomitrium fell-field to be re placed by the Carex-Racomitrium moss-heath and, to wards the west, stands of the Salix-Racomitrium heath usually pick out later snow-beds in the transitional zone from this summit vegetation to the Nardus-Carex heath below. Moving westwards, too, the Cryptogramma- Athyrium community becomes a more widespread feature of complexes of chionophilous vegetation. It can be found in the Cairngorms, but in the western Highlands occurs much more commonly as a fringe over stabilised block scree around the back of corries or over stretches of boulder-strewn ground on sheltered slopes. In species such as K starkei, Polytrichum alpinum, R. lanuginosum and Diplophyllum albicans, the Salix-Raco- mitrium vegetation may show some continuity with the mossy understorey of the Cryptogramma-Athyrium https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.047 Published online by Cambridge University PressU12 Salix herbacea-Racomitrium heterostichum snow-bed 427 community, but the prominence of the ferns generally serves to mark out stands of the latter. Also within the Cryptogramma-Athyrium vegetation, there is a rise to prominence of hypnaceous mosses which, towards the western Highlands, and particularly beyond the Great Glen, become increasingly prominent in the carpet of more chionophilous heaths. Even within the central Highlands, the Deschampsia-Galium community can figure locally over irrigated slopes around Salix-Racomitrium snow-beds, but north of the Affric-Cannich Hills it tends to replace the Carex- Polytrichum heath around the margins of the longer lying snow patches. And, beyond Beinn Dearg, where the Salix-Racomitrium community peters out al together, the Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Deschampsia-Galium grassland is often the most chionophilous vegetation of the sheltered and sunless slopes. Gradual transitions and some stands intermediate between this and the Salix-Racomitrium community occur in some places, but the difference in dominance in the moss carpet is usually clear. On fell-fields in the north-west Highlands, patches of ground with a little snow cover and some amorphous solifluction which, in the central Highlands, would have the Gymnomitrion sub-community of the Salix-Racomitrium vegetation, carry the Silene sub-community of the Carex-Racomitrium heath within which there may be occasional records for G. concinnatum. Distribution "