"u13","Zonation and succession The Deschampsia-Galium grassland is usually found among patchworks of other chionophilous vegetation types where floristic variation depends on such factors as length of snow-lie, freedom of drainage for irrigating waters and the amount of solifluction. Regional and local climatic differences through the range of the community influence the different components of these sequences and there is some possibility of a mediation through grazing of transitions to tail-herb vegetation. In some places, it is possible to see Deschampsia- Galium vegetation continuing upwards an altitudinal sequence of grassy swards from the sub-montane zone into the low-alpine. On Beinn Laoigh, for example, further north over parts of Creag Meagaidh and, to the north-west, in the Monar Forest and the Fannich and Letterewe Hills, mosaics of the Nardus-Galium and Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grasslands occur extensively over the lower slopes and, where these run up to the irrigated ground below snow-bound corries, transitions to the Anthoxanthum-Alchemilla sub-community are found. The strong dominance of D. cespitosa in many stands of the latter is usually sufficient to mark them out clearly, but more mixed grassy covers are quite widespread in this vegetation and then boundaries may be less well defined. Co-dominance of Nardus and D. cespitosa is sometimes seen, for example, and transitions to the Luzula-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland can be especially gradual. In other places, where the ground below corries becomes more gently sloping and increasingly waterlogged, the Anthoxanthum-Alchemilla sub-community passes fairly sharply to Juncus-Festuca grassland, wet heath and blanket mire. More commonly, though, the Deschampsia-Galium grassland occurs among zonations of sub-shrub vege tation, grass- and sedge-heaths and snow-bed communities that are related partly to altitude, partly to the degree of local shelter and partly to edaphic factors such as freedom of drainage and the base-richness of the irrigating waters. The characteristic pattern through the central section of the western Highlands is well seen over the Affric-Cannich and Fannich Hills and, to a lesser extent, in the Monar Forest and, further south, on Bidean nam Bian in Argyll. Here, both kinds of Des champsia-Galium vegetation are widespread and the two can sometimes themselves be found in a gradation upslope, the Anthoxanthum-Alchemilla sub-community passing, often gently, to the Rhytidiadelphus heath with a switch in dominance from D. cespitosa to hypnaceous mosses. Often in this region, too, the community occurs with some type of Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, re placing it with increased altitude and duration of snowlie, or alternating with it over slopes that show some variation in the pattern of irrigation. The occurrence of porous block scree tumbling down hillsides, for example, can provide an environment buffered from the impacts of snow-melt and run-off and such areas often have stands of the Hylocomium-Rhytidiadelphus sub community of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, rich in hypnaceous mosses and with a vascular cover of grasses with Vaccinium myrtillus and Empetrum nigrum, the abundance of these last and the waning importance of D. cespitosa helping to define the boundaries. Much more locally through the north-west Highlands, the Deschampsia-Galium grassland can be found in similar situations with the hepatic-rich form of the Vaccinium- Racomitrium heath, this being especially characteristic of very sheltered and shady areas among boulders. Differences in the amount of irrigation, particularly through the summer, probably play a part, too, in the disposition of the Deschampsia-Galium grassland in relation to the Nardus-Carex grass-heath, a community that is often found with it over moderately snow-bound slopes. The two have many species in common, notably Nardus, F. ovinalvivipara, Alchemilla alpina and hypnaceous mosses, and both grassier and more mossy Des champsia-Galium swards can grade to different sub communities of the Nardus-Carex grass-heath. The Rhytidiadelphus type comes especially close because there the dominance of D. cespitosa, which helps provide a general distinction, is much less pronounced. Where the Deschampsia-Galium grassland, or mix tures of the two above communities, form a fringe around later snow-beds in this part of the western Highlands, they usually give way, where snow-lie is longer, to the Polytrichum-Kiaeria heath. Characteristically, this is a moss-dominated vegetation, with species such as K. starkei usually very abundant and Polytrichum sexangulare and Oligotrichum hercynicum a con stant feature, and herbs such as Saxifraga stellaris and Omalotheca supina common. None of these occur more than very occasionally in the Deschampsia-Galium https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.048 Published online by Cambridge University PressU13 Deschampsia cespitosa-Galium saxatile grassland 435 community, but D. cespitosa, C. bigelowii and Alchemilla alpina can run on with some frequency into the late snow-bed and, where they remain patchily abundant, blur the boundary between the vegetation types. D. cespitosa, A. alpina, G. saxatile, D. flexuosa, R. loreus and P. alpinum also all remain very common in another strongly chionophilous community frequent in this part of the Scottish Highlands, the Cryptogramma-Athyrium vegetation, but mixtures of C. crispa and A. distentifolium typically dominate there and stands almost always mark out stretches of block scree, patches of tumbled boulders or rocky ledges. More difficult to delineate precisely, or to interpret environmentally, are transitions to the Alchemilla- Sibbaldia community which are commonly seen in these mountains over the irrigated ground around late snowbeds. Mixtures of A. alpina and S. procumbens are the usual dominants, sometimes with Minuartia sedoides, Thymus praecox and Omalotheca supina in modest abundance, but grasses can be quite plentiful, among them D. cespitosa, A. capillaris, Anthoxanthum and Nardus, and there may be quite prominent patches of hypnaceous mosses. Such stretches of ground are often fed by the distinctive kinds of snow-bed springs, the Pohlietum glacialis or Sphagno-Anthelieturm scattered shoots of D. cespitosa are frequent in such vegetation but the striking dominance of the respective bryophytes is usually sufficient to mark them out clearly. Finally, in this kind of pattern, the Deschampsia- Galium vegetation, in the form of the Rhytidiadelphus sub-community, frequently extends up to its highest altitudinal limits as small stands marking out sheltered hollows in Carex-Racomitrium heath, the characteristic moss-dominated sward of exposed summits in the more oceanic parts of the Highlands. Separation from stretches of the Typical sub-community of this vege tation, the most widely distributed form, is usually fairly easy, the change from abundance of R. lanuginosum to hypnaceous mosses being well defined. But increasingly towards the north-west, the Carex-Racomitrium heath is represented by the Silene sub-community where, under conditions of severe exposure, the carpet of R. lanuginosum often becomes fragmented, and where intermittent irrigation from snow-melt is marked by patches of R. loreus, P. schreberi and H. splendens and diminutive tussocks of D. cespitosa. The high frequency of mats and cushions of plants such as Salix herbacea, Silene acaulis, Thymus praecox and Armeria maritima generally helps define the Carex-Racomitrium heath but, over ablation fields, the cover is often broken and heterogenous and intimate mosaics of this vegetation with mossy Des champsia-Galium snow-beds can be seen. In shifting northwards, the balance among the ele ments in these sequences changes somewhat. The Polytrichum-Kiaeria snow-bed, for example, can be seen with the Deschampsia-Galium community as far north as Beinn Dearg and Ben Wyvis, but even on Beinn Eighe and the Letterewe Hills, and more obviously on Ben Hope, Foinaven and Ben More Assynt in Sutherland, the Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Deschampsia-Galium vegetation is often among the most chionophilous swards. It is in this part of the Highlands, too, that the similarities and contrasts between the community and the tall-herb Luzula-Geum vegetation, mediated perhaps by climatic and edaphic conditions, perhaps also by grazing, are to be seen in the swards disposed over slopes and ledges of the corries. D. cespitosa, Alchemilla alpina, Agrostis capillaris, Anthoxanthum, D. flexuosa, G. saxatile, R. acetosa and hypnaceous mosses all remain very frequent in Typical Luzula-Geum vege tation and there are transitional stands in which D. cespitosa occurs with particular abundance. But, generally, it is a subordinate plant in the tall-herb stands, and there is typically a good representation of species such as Luzula sylvatica, Geum rivale, Rhodiola rosea, Angelica sylvestris, Filipendula ulmaria and Succisa pratensis, and a ground carpet in which Rhytidiadelphus triquetrus, Thuidium tamariscinum, Plagiomnium undulatum and Rhizomnium punctatum are very common. Comparable transitions to this can also be seen where the substrates and seeping waters tend to be more base-poor, when the tall-herb vegetation is generally of the Luzula- Vaccinium type. Again, here, D. cespitosa may remain frequent and locally of modest abundance, but V. myrtillus, Dryopteris dilatata, Blechnum spicant and Gymnocarpium dryopteris are usually very frequent and, apart from the hypnaceous mosses, the floristic overlap is less than with the Luzula-Geum community. East of Creag Meagaidh and Ben Heasgarnich in the central Highlands, the Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Deschampsia-Galium grassland becomes very fragmentary and is replaced geographically in moderately late snow-beds by the Carex-Polytrichum sedgeheath. Both kinds of vegetation are to be seen together on Creag Meagaidh and Ben Alder and in some localities, on Ben Lawers for example, there are quite extensive tracts of heath of a somewhat intermediate character (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Also in the central Highlands, on Ben Alder and Beinn Laoigh, are some snow-bound slopes where the Deschampsia-Galium community can be found with Salix-Racomitrium snowbeds as well as those of the Polytrichum-Kiaeria type, but there is usually little difficulty in distinguishing the patches of this strongly chionophilous vegetation with its cover of dwarf willow and diagnostic bryophytes. Further east, the Anthoxanthum-Alchemilla sub community continues to find a place beyond the range of the Rhytidiadelphus sub-community among sequences of moderately chionophilous heaths and grasslands, as around Lochnagar and Caenlochan (Huntley 1979), but https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.048 Published online by Cambridge University Press436 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities it is a minor element in such patterns and sometimes looks very much like a replacement for tail-herb and fern vegetation that has been derived by grazing. Distribution "