"u14","Zonation and succession The Alchemilla-Sibbaldia community is a widespread, though usually not very extensive, element among suites of more chionophilous vegetation of the low-to middle- alpine zones throughout the Highlands. The associated communities vary somewhat according to differences in regional climate, but the most important factors influencing the disposition and extent of the vegetation types are the duration of snow-lie, the pattern of drainage of melt or flushing waters, the stability of the ground and the base-richness of the soils. Some stands may be influenced by grazing, but this is essentially a climax community. Through much of its range, the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia vegetation occurs in association with the Polytrichum- Kiaeria or Salix-Racomitrium late snow-beds and the permanent springs of the Pohlietum glacialis, three extremely chionophilous communities whose overall distributions are roughly coincident with this. Sometimes the patterns are quite well defined with the snowbeds occupying the centres of hollows or the most sheltered and shaded slopes of corries, and patches of the Pohlietum marking the spring heads with the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia vegetation over the irrigated ground below and around these, and sometimes running up behind where a cornice of snow is held around the corrie rim. In other cases, where snow persists patchily over a slope, with sporadic flushing over uneven ground between and below the late beds, the mosaics may be more complex and the elements less sharply delineated. Typically, the Polytrichum-Kiaeria and Salix-Racomitrium communities are distinguished by an abundance of more chionophilous mosses like K. starkei, P. sexangulare, Oligotrichum hercynicum and Racomitrium heterostichum which are hardly ever extensive in the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia swards. However, prominent patches of R. fasciculare may occur throughout the zonation and such characteristic species as Alchemilla alpina, Omalotheca supina and Luzula spicata, even Sibbaldia on occasion, can run on with high frequency and local abundance over the more snow-bound ground. Quite often, too, and particularly towards the lower limits of the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia community in the low- alpine zone, the moderately chionophilous Nardus- Carex grass-heath is found with this vegetation, melt water from its snow cover frequently providing the source of irrigating waters. Here, the abundance of Nardus and C. bigelowii, more locally of Scirpus cespito- sus, sometimes with a carpet of R. lanuginosum or hypnaceous mosses, will usually serve as a marker of the boundaries. Less easy to differentiate in many cases is the Deschampsia-Galium community which increasingly towards the west occupies at least some of the low-and middle-alpine slopes covered by fairly long-lying snow or irrigated by melt from it. Where D. cespitosa is strongly dominant in such vegetation, as is quite often the case on less snow-bound ground, the two communities are usually distinct, but there is strong floristic continuity between them and less luxuriant Deschampsia-Galium swards can grade smoothly into Alchemilla- Sibbaldia vegetation where irrigation becomes somewhat more sporadic and the soils rather less stable. Mosaics of all these communities, together with fern- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.049 Published online by Cambridge University PressU14 Alchemilla alpina-Sibbaldia procumbens dwarf-herb community 443 dominated stands of the Cryptogramma-Athyrium snow-bed on stretches of block scree, are very characteristic of the upper snow-bound slopes of the Fannich and Affric-Cannich hills, Beinn Dearg, and to a lesser extent of the Monar Forest, though there the more chionophilous elements tend to be fragmentarily developed. Northwards from this part of Scotland, moss-dominated stands of the Deschampsia-Galium community tend to occupy the latest snow-beds and around Letter- ewe and Ben More Assynt Alchemilla-Sibbaldia vege tation can be found on irrigated ground around these, grading to the centre with an increase in hypnaceous mosses and a loss of less chionophilous herbs. Beyond here, however, the community becomes of very patchy occurrence on the mountains of the far north-west. Moving south across the Great Glen into the central Highlands broadly similar patterns to those described above can be seen on Bidean Nam Bian, Ben Alder and Creag Meagaidh, though to the east of here, the Des champsia-Galium vegetation tends to be replaced in the sequences by the Carex-Polytrichum sedge-heath, the swards of which are usually quite distinct from the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia community. The Alchemilla- Sibbaldia vegetation itself continues to be well represented even into the drier east-central Highlands, where it is an important element in the varied and extensive suites of chionophilous vegetation over the northern slopes of the Cairngorms. The other striking kind of zonation which is best seen in the central Highlands involves transitions between the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia community and other more calcicolous vegetation types of moderately snow-bound slopes and irrigated ground. The Festuca-Alchemilla- Silene community in particular is very close in its floristics and physiognomy and is most often found with Alchemilla-Sibbaldia vegetation over the limestones and calcareous mica-schists of the Breadalbane Mountains. It is distinctly more calcicolous in its total flora, though it is often the abundance of less demanding species like Silene acaulis and Minuartia sedoides that provide the most obvious indication of its extent, with Sibbaldia taking their place on moving into the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia community. And environmentally, it is the longer duration of snow lie that determines the shift to the latter vegetation type. Quite often the sequence continues into stands of the distinctive montane flush vegetation of the Caricetum saxatilis on waterlogged ground in hollows or around permanent Cratoneuron-Festuca springs. Continuously irrigated slopes can have rich stands of Deschampsia-Galium grassland and where more inac cessible banks or ledges occur the dwarf-herb stands can pass to the luxuriant Luzula-Geum or Dryas-Silene communities or dripping Saxifraga-Alchemilla vegetation. Freedom from grazing often mediates the shift to tall-herb assemblages and the Alchemilla-Sibbaldia swards may sometimes experience some cropping and trampling. Ultimately, though, it is climatic and edaphic conditions which maintain the community as a climax. Distribution "