"u15","Zonation and succession The Saxifraga-Alchemilla community is typically found in zonations and mosaics with other kinds of calcicolous montane vegetation, where floristic variation is related mostly to differences in soils, and the intensity of grazing and trampling by stock, factors which are often com pounded as topography becomes less rocky and inac cessible. It is a climax community under the very particular conditions which favour its development. Such conditions are usually maintained over only limited areas, so Saxifraga-Alchemilla banks are typically of but small extent, continuous stands rarely stretching for more than 20 m2. A common situation is for carpets of this vegetation to festoon the steep drip ping faces of little rocky outcrops in tracts of grassland or parts of more extensive crags, gully sides and cliffs of corries. Often, the sheer abundance of S. aizoides is sufficient to mark off the community from the bare or vegetated surrounds, but gradual transitions from these banks to a variety of other vegetation types are frequent. Especially gentle are those changes which can be seen where fractured brows grade into continuous grassy swards over the surrounding slopes, vegetation which is often strongly flushed, though not kept so thoroughly wet as the rock faces, and which is also frequently grazed, particularly towards the lower altitudes. Where the ground is more or less equally calcareous over such transitions, with continuity of bedrock or with base richness maintained by the seepage, the typical vege tation around is the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, the major plagioclimax pasture of the sub-montane and sub-alpine zones. Particularly distinctive of higher altitude and more strongly flushed slopes carrying this vegetation is the Saxifraga-Ditrichum sub community. This shows very strong floristic continuity with the Saxifraga-Alchemilla community through fre quent records for S. aizoides, S. oppositifolia, Alchemilla glabra, A. alpina, Festuca rubra, F. ovinalvivipara, Sela ginella, Deschampsia cespitosa, Carex pulicaris, Polygonum viviparum, Pinguicula vulgaris, Thymus praecox and Ctenidium molluscum and in some cases it is very hard to discern a boundary between the two vegetation types. In general, though, the pattern of dominance is different, the balance lying with grasses and small sedges in the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus swards; and there are usually rather more frequent records there for mesophytic herbs like Viola riviniana, Plantago lanceolata and Prunella vulgaris. Rather similar flushed stands of Festuca- Agrostis-Alchemilla grassland can also be found in some places juxtaposed with the Saxifraga-Alchemilla community, but the continuity of more demanding calcicoles is much less marked there, and S. aizoides and S. oppositifolia rarely extend far into such swards. Open, stony flushes over steeper ground among such grasslands, strongly irrigated with base-rich waters, typically support the Carici-Saxifragetum, a calcicolous small-sedge mire that also has much in common floristically with the Saxifraga-Alchemilla community. S. aizoides itself is a constant there and often an abundant plant, and there are frequent records, too, in the Thalic- trum-Juncus sub-community characteristic of higher altitudes, for Alchemilla alpina, A. glabra, Selaginella, Carexpulicaris, Pinguicula vulgaris, Thalictrum alpinum, Polygonum viviparum and various of the basiphile bryophytes common on dripping cliffs. Where vigorous flushes emerge adjacent to rock faces and in gullies with https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.050 Published online by Cambridge University PressU15 Saxifraga aizoides-Alchemilla glabra banks 449 Saxifraga-Alchemilla vegetation, fairly gradual transitions between the communities can be seen, or confusing mosaics of open, gravelly banks and unusually lush patches of mire, a feature well seen in the samples which Huntley (1979) collected from Caenlochan. Again, how ever, the pattern of dominance in the two vegetation types is generally different, with sedges like C. demissa, C. panicea, C.flacca and C. dioica, as well as C.pulicaris, having a more important role in the Carici-Saxifrageturn. Also, there, Juncus triglumis is much more common and J. articulatus, which is hardly ever found in the Saxifraga-Alchemilla community, is constant. Bryophytes like Campylium stellatum and Drepanocladus revolvens become very frequent, too, along with Blindia acuta, Aneura pinguis and Bryum pseudotriquetrum. Patchworks of all these vegetation types are a common feature of many of the mountains between Beinn Laoigh and Clova, and of those localities further to the north-west where exposures of calcareous rocks provide more than just very isolated cliffs with basiphile vegetation among extensive stretches of Nardo-Galion grasslands and grass-heaths. In some places, too, as on the higher ground of Ben Lawers, and around Ben Heasgarnich, the Saxifraga-Alchemilla community can be seen grading to the Festuca-Alchemilla-Silene dwarfherb vegetation on the skeletal mull soils which develop over drier gentler slopes or from the finer detritus that tumbles or slumps from cliffs and banks. In some senses, this is a low-alpine counterpart to the kinds of transitions to grasslands that are seen over the slopes at lesser altitudes, although here moderate snow-lie and solifluction are important additional factors in keeping the vegetation of the sheltered and less resistant ground open and rich in competition-sensitive Arctic-Alpines. Plants like Silene acaulis, Sibbaldia procumbens and Minuartia sedoides are thus very common in the Festuca- Alchemilla-Silene vegetation, along with Luzula spicata, Omalotheca supina and Salix herbacea and, with the virtual disappearance of Saxifraga aizoides, Pinguicula vulgaris and Carex pulicaris, the distinction between the communities is usually clear. However, S. oppositifolia remains frequent in the dwarf-herb swards and where it is this saxifrage as much as S. aizoides that characterises the Saxifraga-Alchemilla vegetation, along with prominent Alchemilla alpina, Thymus praecox, Selaginella and more abundant hypnaceous mosses than usual, the separation of the communities may be less easy, particularly over crumbling cliffs of mica-schist. Even in the harsh montane environment of these higher slopes, grazing may play some part in maintaining the open character of dwarf-herb vegetation but where more inaccessible ground, often still craggy like that beneath Saxifraga-Alchemilla banks, but not so moist, occurs among the dripping cliffs, the Dryas-Silene community can be seen. This very rich and luxuriant vegetation typically has a mat of smaller herbs including Saxifraga aizoides, S. oppositifolia, Alchemilla alpina, Selaginella and Thymus as well as many of the grasses and bryophytes of the Saxifraga-Alchemilla banks, but such woody plants as Dryas octopetala, Vaccinium vitis- idaea, V. myrtillus, V. uliginosum and the Arctic-Alpine willows Salix reticulata and S. arbuscula occur as an open and uneven cover, and there is a variety of taller herbs. Transitions between these vegetation types can be seen on the cliff faces and ledges of Beinn Laoigh. Elsewhere on damp ledges, stable but ungrazed and with calcareous to neutral soils, the Saxifraga-Alchemilla carpets can merge with the Luzula-Geum community. Again, in its finest development, this can be extraordinarily rich and luxuriant with a great abundance of tall herbs that gives an unmistakable look to the vege tation, but less distinctive stands can be found and, with frequent records for Saxifraga aizoides, Alchemilla glab ra, Pinguicula vulgaris and Bryum pseudotriquetrum among a carpet of Deschampsia cespitosa, Luzula sylvatica, Festuca ovinalvivipara and F. rubra with scattered Geum rivale and Rhodiola rosea, there can be a fairly gradual transition to adjacent Saxifraga-Alchemilla banks. Over more precipitous and ledge-free cliffs, each of these vegetation types can become fragmented into heterogenous and peculiar assemblages which it is diffi cult to characterise. However, one fairly distinct transition of this kind can be seen where more extensive carpets of Saxifraga-Alchemilla vegetation give way to small pockets of chasmophytes rooted in rock crevices. The composition and patterning of such assemblages is often a close reflection of the lithology and structure of the particular exposure, but harder limestones often have some form of Asplenium-Cystopteris vegetation. Plants such as the saxifrages, Thymus, Oxyria and Rhodiola can occur scattered through the fragments of this community but it is generally ferns like Asplénium viride, A. trichomanis, A. ruta-muraria, Cystopterisfragi- lis and Polystichum lonchitis, together with basiphilous bryophytes, that are the most prominent elements. Distribution "