"u16","Zonation and succession The Luzula-Vaccinium community is sometimes found among grasslands and heaths where variations in graz ing intensity or frequency of burning over open slopes and summits have determined the vegetation pattern. Very often, though, the protection necessary for the maintenance of the community depends on topographic discontinuities which set stands apart from the sur rounding vegetation in stretches of broken, rocky ground. In such situations, the Luzula-Vaccinium community can sometimes occur with other tail-herb and fern-dominated assemblages, differences in soils determining the mixture of vegetation types, or with patches of scrub if there has been an opportunity for further succession. Throughout the range of the community, and especially in the more oceanic west, the Anthoxanthum- Festuca sub-community can be found in zonations and mosaics over open slopes with a variety of grassland types. It is particularly distinctive over summits at moderate altitudes around the Atlantic seaboard of Scotland (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962) and on some cliff- top sites (e.g. Prentice & Prentice 1975), but it also occurs on hillsides and in smaller valleys and gullies. Often, such stands are little islands isolated within extensive tracts of other swards, but larger stretches of this kind of Luzula- Vaccinium vegetation are to be seen in some places, even quite far from the west of Scotland, as in the Moffat and Ettrick hills, and on Ben Loyal in Sutherland whole corries slopes are covered with the Anthoxanthum-Festuca sub-community (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe 1977). The great abundance of L. sylvatica is usually sufficient to provide a clear boundary between the vegetation types, despite the strong continuity among the associates, although a number of grasslands show patchy prominence of the club-rush, and then it may be hard to delimit the elements of transitional mosaics. These often involve Nardus-Galium or Festuca-Agrostis-Galium swards, par ticularly through the Southern Uplands, and in both of these the Nardo-Galion grasses, dicotyledons and bryophytes preferential to the Anthoxanthum-Festuca sub community thicken up to form the bulk of the turf. On peatier soils in wetter areas, like the western Highlands, and particularly where slopes receive much run-off from precipitation or snow-melt, the Anthoxanthum-Festuca sub-community is found more often in close association with the Deschampsia-Galium grassland, with which there is again marked similarity among the associates, though which is typically dominated by D. cespitosa. Moderately snow-bound slopes where there is some drainage impedence can show a shift from the Anthoxanthum-Festuca sub-community to some kind of Nar dus-Carex vegetation from which L. sylvatica is generally excluded by lack of free water movement, and with the shift to exposed summits at high altitudes, this kind of Luzula- Vaccinium vegetation can give way to Carex- Racomitrium heath. Throughout these zonations, variations in grazing intensity and the occurrence of burning can mediate transitions to a variety of sub-shrub com munities. Towards lower altitudes, these are usually of the Calluna-Vaccinium or Calluna-Erica types, with Calluna-Racomitrium and Vaccinium-Racomitrium dwarfed heaths figuring on higher ground where exposure to wind and snow become important determining influences on the vegetation cover. In each case, increase in abundance of sub-shrubs other than V. myrtillus, and the eventual eclipse of L. sylvatica, are enough to mark the boundaries between the vegetation types. An altitudinal zonation from the Anthoxanthum-Festuca sub community, through Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath to summit Carex-Racomitrium heath is a striking feature of the rather unusual vegetation cover of Ben Loyal (Rat cliffe 1977). Species-poor Luzula- Vaccinium vegetation quite fre quently replaces the Anthoxanthum-Festuca sub community in patterns of the above types, but it can also be seen on ledges and among blocky talus, separated from surrounding communities by bare rock, or by stretches of open water where it occurs on islands. It is in such situations, too, that the Dryopteris-Dicranum sub community is characteristically found, and there are places where a gradually more inaccessible topography is marked by a zonation from close-cropped Nardo- Galion swards, through a fringe of the Anthoxanthum- Festuca sub-community to the Dryopteris-Dicranum sub-community, with increasing luxuriance of the vege tation and the appearance of the more grazing-sensitive herbs. Occasionally, such a transition may run on into patchy scrub, with saplings of birch or rowan marking out fragmentary Quer eus-Betula-Dicranum woodland or, at higher altitudes, Arctic-Alpine willows increasing https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.051 Published online by Cambridge University PressU16 Luzula sylvatica-Vaccinium myrtillus tall-herb community 457 their cover to dominate in a stand of Salix-Luzula scrub. In each case, the Luzula- Vaccinium vegetation can run on virtually unchanged to form the field and ground layers of these communities. In other sites, particularly on north- or east-facing slopes, where shade, shelter and the persistence of snow maintain especially cool and humid conditions, the Dryopteris-Dicranum sub community can mark out the most inaccessible areas of ground among mosaics of Deschampsia-Galium grassland and Calluna- Vaccinium-Sphagnum heath, with the latter of which the Luzula-Vaccinium community can show strong continuity in its associated herbs and bryophytes. Quite often, however, the Dryopteris-Dicranum sub community is completely isolated from the more accessible grasslands and heaths. Frequently, it occupies entire ledges or tracts of bouldery ground, though where there is some heterogeneity in the rocks making up the cliffs or screes, or variation in the quality of flushing waters seeping from them, there can be transitions to other kinds of grazing-sensitive vegetation. A shift to more base-rich and mesotrophic soils, for example, marking out exposures of calcareous sedimentaries or lime-rich intrusions or shatter zones, or some local base-rich seepage into largely impoverished soils, can see a shift to the Luzula-Geum community, with its richer and more basiphilous flora, or patches dominated by ferns. The close proximity of varied communities of this general kind was a feature of the ledges described from North Hoy by Prentice & Prentice (1975) and it is seen to spectacular effect on the giant ledge of Beinn Bhan, where streaks and patches of the different vegetation types mark out drier zones and seepage patches. Distribution "