"u17","Zonation and succession Usually, the inaccessibility necessary for the development of the Luzula-Geum community means that stands occur set apart from the grasslands and heaths of surrounding montane slopes among tracts of broken, rocky ground. Other herb and fern-dominated communities can share such ledge and cliff habitats, the vegetation types disposed according to variations in base richness and wetness of the soils and the amount of exposure to wind and frost, with patchy occurrence of scrub representing the but sporadic succession to woody vegetation that is possible in isolated ungrazed situations in the sub-alpine zone. At lower altitudes towards the more oceanic west of Scotland, serai progression to sub-montane scrub is more probable, although burning is especially likely there to convert stands to heath. The floristic and structural contrasts between the Luzula-Geum vegetation and its grazed counterparts on moist, base-rich and mesotrophic soils at similar alti tudes are seen most clearly and instructively in the Breadalbane range and around Caenlochan in the Grampians, where corries and their adjacent slopes cut into calcareous rocks offer sites which are to varying degrees inaccessible to stock and deer. In these moun tains, the Geranium sub-community occupies many of the most isolated ledges and crags where there is some shelter, with Deschampsia cespitosa-^ommeAQ^ swards on irrigated and often moderately snow-bound, though stable, hillsides around. The less basiphilous of this vegetation, developing where seepage is insufficient to offset leaching, can be included in the Deschampsia- Galium grassland, the Anthoxanthum-Alchemilla sub community of which has occasional records for some of the characteristic Luzula-Geum herbs. Very often, though, the soils are sufficiently calcareous and mesotrophic to support richer vegetation than this over the open slopes, swards which experience at least some grazing, are grass-dominated with herbs nibbled down to rosettes, but often qualitatively indistinguishable from the Agrostis-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Luzula-Geum vegetation. This is what McVean and Ratciffe (1962) characterised as species-rich Deschamp- sietum caespitosae alpinum, and it forms a virtual continuum with tall-herb stands of the community where there is a gradual increase in slope or increasing frag mentation of the ground into systems of ledges running out on to cliffs. In other places, the Geranium or the somewhat less rich Agrostis-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community, are found sharply separated by expanses of bare rock from Deschampsia-Galium swards or more high-altitude tracts of anthropogenic Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus or Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grasslands where the sur rounding grazed slopes are but modestly flushed. Sometimes, the Luzula-Geum vegetation occupies all available ledges in such cliff and ravine systems, but quite often there is some variety in the cover. Geological differences across outcrops, for example, or variations in the extent of flushing, can result in the juxtaposition of tall-herb stands of contrasting composition, more base-poor and oligotrophic soils often showing a shift to the Luzula- Vaccinium community. Such patterns are especially well seen through the western Highlands, where calcareous rocks tends to be of more localised occurrence. On Ben Hope, for example, calcareous hornblende schists provide some local enrichment in granulite outcrops, while in the Letterewe Forest there are Serpulite Grits and Fucoid Beds among Lewisian gneiss. Then, on the Bens Griam and North Hoy in Orkney, variations in Old Red Sandstone, and on Skye differences in Tertiary basalts can show this kind of variation (Birks 1973, Prentice & Prentice 1975, Ratcliffe 1977). Most cele brated of all, perhaps, is the variegation in the tall-herb cover on the great Coire na Poite ledge on Beinn Bhan, where base-rich seepage from the Torridonian Sandstone cliffs is marked by stripes of the Luzula-Geum community among stretches of Luzula- Vaccinium vege tation. The differences between the two assemblages can be very striking, with the much greater richness of https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.052 Published online by Cambridge University Press468 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities basiphile and mesophytic herbs in the Luzula-Geum community, but intergradations do occur, and increasingly towards the more oceanic west of Scotland, the great abundance of ferns in ungrazed vegetation often masks floristic variation among the smaller associates. The Primula-Hypericum sub-community in particular, the predominant form of the Luzula-Geum vegetation at lower altitudes through the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland, can come very close in its composition to the Luzula-Vaccinium community (Spence 1960, Prentice & Prentice 1975). On more calcareous mountains, as through Breadalbane, the Luzula-Geum vegetation is often the only tail herb community, but differences in the amount of seepage and the degree of exposure can mediate transitions to other kinds of cliff and knoll vegetation. Where irrigation with base-rich water over rock faces is strong and constant, for example with soils and herbage kept in a dripping-wet condition, the Luzula-Geum community is typically replaced by the Saxifraga-Alchemilla vege tation. The Alchemilla-Bryum sub-community can be seen as transitional to this, and plants such as Des champsia cespitosa, Alchemilla alpina, A. glabra, Carex pulicaris, Thalictrum alpinum, Polygonum viviparum, Ranunculus acris, Ctenidium molluscum and Bryum pseudotriquetrum continue to be very frequent, with other species like Geum rivale, Rhodiola, Oxyria and Luzula sylvatica also occurring occasionally. But in the Saxifraga-Alchemilla vegetation, dominance generally passes to S. aizoides and S. oppositifolia, which form sopping banks, hanging down over rock faces and earth slopes, with the other herbs scattered through. Some other plants, like Pinguicula vulgaris, Parnassia palustris, Blindia acuta and Aneura pinguis, also become very much more common. A very different kind of transition, though equally characteristic of the calcareous crags of the Breadalbane mountains, is seen where ungrazed ledges become more exposed to the effects of fierce winds and, being blown clear of snow, to winter frosts. In such places, the Dryas- Silene community is the typical kind of vegetation, its varied patchworks of basiphile dwarf shrubs, tall herbs, cushion plants, grasses, sedges and bryophytes reflecting the skeletal, calcareous nature of the soils, subject to much freeze-thaw and solifluction. Some plants, like Succisa, Angelica, Geranium sylvaticum, Alchemilla alpina, A. glabra, montane Hieracia, Geum rivale, Fili- pendula ulmaria, Rhodiola, Saussurea and Luzula sylvatica can, by virtue of their locally luxuriant growth, give a measure of continuity between the Dryas-Silene community and the Luzula-Geum vegetation. Usually, however, where sheltered ledges pass above to windswept brows or, with a shift of aspect, are replaced by more exposed shelves of rock, the floristic and physiognomic changes are very striking. Many of the bulkier plants either disappear or become stunted in their growth and other species, crowded out among the tail herb growth, are much more frequent: in particular, Dryas octopetala, Thymus praecox, Silene acaulis, Ditrichum flexicaule and Tortella tortuosa become a constant feature among the low carpets of these bleak crags. Transitions from such vegetation to grazed swards around are often marked by a switch to the Festuca- Alchemilla-Silene community, a parallel pattern to that involving the Luzula-Geum and Deschampsia-Galium communities, and mosaics of all four vegetation types are a memorable feature of parts of Ben Lawers, Meall Ghaordie, Beinn Laoigh and Caenlochan-Clova (Rat cliffe 1977). Arctic-Alpine willows, particularly Salix lapponum, occasionally find a place in stands of both the Luzula- Geum and Dryas-Silene communities on high-altitude crags, and there seems little doubt that such colonisation can be a step towards the development of Salix-Luzula scrub, the climax woody vegetation of the low-alpine zone in the Scottish Highlands. In fact, invasion of this kind is often very problematic, because seed-parents are widely scattered, frequently growing in single-sex populations (Poore & McVean 1957), colonisation sites like wise very local and growth upon them perhaps so luxuriant as to prevent germination of fertile seed. Commonly, then, the Luzula-Geum community at these altitudes is an effective climax vegetation. At lower levels, towards the western seaboard of Scotland, there is less climatic restriction on the succession of ungrazed tail-herb vegetation to scrub or woodland, although again seed-parents are often very local in their distribution. A likely development here, from the Primula-Hypericum sub-community, would be some kind of Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland, probably dominated by Sorbus aucuparia and Betula pubes- cens: indeed, saplings of these are sometimes found in tail-herb vegetation in this region. Distribution "