"u18","Zonation and succession The Cryptogramma-Athyrium community is usually found as a visually distinct but quite integral component of suites of chionophilous vegetation types disposed over snow-bound slopes of varying rockiness, steepness and stability at higher altitudes through the Scottish Highlands. With the geographical shift eastwards, the community becomes much more local and there are some changes among the other elements represented in these patterns. Wherever snow-bound slopes in the low-and middle- alpine zones are interrupted by crags or brows of acidic rocks, bouldery patches or tracts of block scree which retain their snow cover long and deep, the Cryptogramma-Athyrium community is likely to be represented, particularly through the western Highlands. Stands can be very small, just a few square metres in extent, or up to several hectares, although such bigger stretches tend to be rather heterogeneous, resolving into mosaics on closer inspection. Sometimes, the context for the community is some kind of high-altitude grassland or grass-heath, covering the less rocky slopes around, from which snow is blown clear or melts away earlier in the spring. The Nardus-Carex community, for example, commonly occupies moderately snow-bound slopes with impeded drainage up to about 900 m throughout the range of the Cryptogramma-Athyrium vegetation, and is often found on gentler and less sharply draining ground around it. With its heathy mixtures of Nardus and Carex bigelowii, however, and occasional local abundance of Scirpus cespitosus, the Nardus-Carex community is usually well defined. Closer in composition and especially associated with the fern beds through the western Highlands, is the Deschampsia- Galium grassland, which includes swards of peaty soils on cold, flushed slopes where snow-melt is often a major source of the irrigating waters. Ferns occur occasionally in this kind of vegetation, and small patches of the Cryptogramma-Athyrium community can mark out lit tle groups of boulders within it. Moreover, with plants like Deschampsia cespitosa, D. flexuosa, Galium saxatile, Alchemilla alpina, Viola palustris, Rumex acetosa and bulkier mosses occurring frequently in both vegetation types, the similarities between them are sometimes very obvious, and there can be some interlocking where thin stretches of turf run in among blocky talus around the edges of screes. These kinds of pattern can be seen over the upper less calcareous exposures on Beinn Laoigh, on Bidean nam Bian, Beinn Eighe, Beinn Dearg, through the Affric-Cannich, Fannich and Letterewe hills and, in more fragmentary fashion, on Ben More Assynt to the north. It is in these mountains, too, that the floristic similarities between the Cryptogramma-Athyrium community and more oligotrophic tail-herb ledge vege tation are most apparent, and over the corrie slopes, screes and ledges of sites like Beinn Bhan, Beinn Eighe and the Letterewe Forest, the fern beds can be found in close association with both the Luzula- Vaccinium vege tation and Deschampsia-Galium swards perhaps partly derived from them by grazing. A. distentifolium can be locally abundant in the Luzula-Vaccinium community, as on the Coire na Poite ledge on Beinn Bhan, where flushing in an equable climate compensates for the shelter and humidity provided by longer snow-lie, and in such situations it can be quite hard to distinguish the vegetation from Cryptogramma-Athyrium beds. Through the western Highlands, the moss-rich Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Deschampsia-Galium grassland often represents the most chionophilous kind of vegetation on gentler unbroken slopes with humic rankers and podzols kept wet and cold throughout the year by irrigation with melt and run-off. Where the Cryptogramma-Athyrium community occurs on rocky brows around such late snow-beds or among patches of boulders which are disposed between hollows, it is generally clearly defined by the abundance of ferns, but there can be a strong continuity between the ground carpet of the two vegetation types, with R. loreus, H. splendens, Racomitrium lanuginosum, Polytrichum alpi num and Barbilophoziafloerkii frequent throughout. To the west of Creag Meagaidh and Ben Heasgarnich, where the Cryptogramma-Athyrium community is very local on snow-bound bouldery ground in the Cairngorms and on Lochnagar, the Deschampsia-Galium snow-beds are replaced by the Carex-Polytrichum type, swards which are not so strongly chionophilous as the fern beds, but sometimes found juxtaposed with them on gentle, ill-drained ground that carries longer snow cover than is usual for the Nardus-Carex grass-heath. Deschampsia cespitosa, D. flexuosa and bryophytes such as Polytrichum alpinum, Dicranum fuscescens and Racomitrium lanuginosum provide a measure of continuity here, but Carex bigelowii is usually at least a co dominant in the swards and ferns are hardly every found. Through much of the range of the Cryptogramma- Athyrium community, however, it is the Polytrichum- Kiaeria vegetation that is its most consistent companion in the very latest snow-beds. This comprises bryophyte- dominated swards with an abundance of mosses and hepatics that find, at most, a sparse representation in the fern beds, species such as Kiaeria starkei, Polytrichum https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.053 Published online by Cambridge University PressU18 Cryptogramma crispa-Athyrium distentifolium snow-bed 481 sexangulare, P. alpinum, Oligotrichum hercynicum and Barbilophozia floerkii providing most of the ground cover, with but sparse occurrence of vascular plants like Deschampsia cespitosa, Saxifraga stellaris and Omalo- theca supina and only very rare records for ferns. Typically, this vegetation occupies the sodden humic soils that cover quite steep slopes, snow-bound well into the late spring, through the middle-alpine zone. The ground is stable, though not rocky, and the community generally passes very sharply to the Cryptogramma-Athyrium vegetation where there is a bouldery surround above the snow-bed. More unstable soils, equally snow-bound, but subject to frost-heave and solifluction, may have the Salix-Racomitrium community, characterised by crusts of Salix herbacea and bryophytes, and mosaics of this and the Polytrichum-Kiaeria vegetation often occur together on the slopes below patches of the Cryptogramma-Athyrium vegetation. Through much of the range of the"fern stands of this kind, the summit plateaus above the middle-alpine snow-beds have Carex-Racomitrium heath or fell-field, with the Juncus-Racomitrium heath replacing this through the Cairngorms. Distribution "