"u19","Zonation and succession The Thelypteris-Blechnum community is usually found among grasslands, heaths and woodlands in zonations and mosaics which reflect differences in soils, local climate and treatments. In successional terms, this kind of vegetation is probably serai to oak-birch or pine forest, though many stands persist in an apparently stable condition, particularly towards higher altitudes. The general context for stands of this community is a patchwork of grasslands and heaths dispersed over stream banks and valley sides. The Festuca-Agrostis- Galium grassland, the major plagioclimax sward of base-poor soils through the uplands, is a common element where there is grazing in such mosaics, with the Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla or even the Festuca- Agrostis-Thymus grassland represented where irrigation brings a measure of base-enrichment to the slopes. T. limbosperma can persist in such swards but the major element of continuity is among plants like F. ovina, Agrostis spp., Anthoxanthum, Potentilla erecta, G. saxatile, V. riviniana, O. acetosella and the bryophytes which can form a matrix in more grassy stands of Thelypteris- Blechnum vegetation, then coalesce into a continuous turf with a shift into the grassland. Similar mosaics and gradations occur where the community is found among heaths occupying base-poor soils that are more sharply draining or ground that is regularly burned. These vary according to the particular region and local climate, the Calluna-Erica heath being the characteristic associate at lower altitudes in more oceanic areas, the Calluna-Vaccinium heath in more montane settings, and there eventually giving way above to Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath. In such situations, it is species like V. myrtillus, Calluna, G. saxatile, Blechnum, the grasses and bryophytes which provide continuity among the vegetation types, clumps of T. limbosperma again persisting patchily in the transition zones. Through the sub-montane parts of the uplands, such vegetation types represent treatment-derived replacements for forest and the occurrence among them of the Thelypteris-Blechnum community can often be regarded as a transitional stage in succession. Over most of the range of this kind of vegetation, it is Quercion oak-birch woods that represent the climax on the moist, base-poor soils characteristic here, with the Quer eus-Betula-Oxalis woodland on the less impoverished ground, the Quercus-Be tula-Dicranum on the more oligotrophic. Thelypteris-Blechnum stands can be found in close association with these forest communities, sometimes forming a fringe around their upper margins, and occur with scrubby fragments in ravines and along stream sides. Towards the eastern Highlands, the community is also found among Pinus-Hylocomium forest and Juniperus- Oxalis scrub which is serai to pine there though often persisting as a perpetually renewed relic. Luxuriant fern- dominated patches are a striking feature of ungrazed enclaves among such juniper scrub in places like Mor- rone (Huntley & Birks 1979a,b) and also, further south, in Upper Teesdale (Graham 1971, Gilbert 1980), and the Viola-Anemone sub-community of Juniperus-Oxalis scrub can be virtually a Thelypteris-Blechnum stand with https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.054 Published online by Cambridge University PressU19 Thelypteris limbosperma-Blechnum spicant community 485 an associated juniper canopy. Both T. limbosperma and J. communis ssp. communis, seem to favour the relief from stagnation and extreme base-impoverishment that irrigation brings, though of course a dense fern cover is inimical to establishment of juniper seedlings. At higher altitudes, or even on lower slopes where seed-parents are in short supply, the Thelypteris- Blechnum community can persist without progressing further. Distribution "