"u2","Zonation and succession The Deschampsia grassland is most often found with sub-shrub vegetation, woodland, scrub and bracken in mosaics which reflect complex histories of land use, particularly forest clearance, burning and grazing, and on lowland heaths it now often makes but a small contribution to remnants of semi-natural vegetation where neglect is the major controlling factor in community distribution. Soil-related sequences can sometimes still be discerned beneath the serai patterns, with the Deschampsia grassland occupying a transitional position between wet heath and ephemeral-rich grassland. Around the upland fringes, the patterns are essentially the same, though the particular vegetation types involved can be different and here, too, the grassland can occur in close association with mire communities. In The Weald, in such places as Iping Common in Sussex, Thursley, Hankley and Chobham Commons in Surrey (Ratcliffe 1977) and over some of the remaining open spaces around London, the Deschampsia grassland forms an integral part of the patchwork of communities that has developed over the more free-draining base poor soils with the abandonment of burning, grazing and other traditional treatments like the cutting of bracken and gorse. Much of the ground is now occupied by what was early referred to as ‘oak-birch heath ’ (Tansley 1911, 1939, Wooldridge & Goldring 1953), that is, open, immature Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland with local dominance by a variety of invading trees. Birch, usually B. pendula, oak, mostly Q. robur but with Q. petraea locally abundant, and pine, particularly P. sylvestris but with other species seeding in from planted stock, are all important. And, on some Surrey sites, the naturalised alien Amelanchier lamarkii has gained a hold in such mosaics. In certain places, as on Holmbury and Leith Hill, dead heather and gorse among the woodland litter shows that such vegetation has succeeded heath over the past 40 years or so, while elsewhere trees have invaded more open ground directly after burning episodes. In other sites, there is overgrown Calluna-Ulex minor heath, dense bracken or, where there has been some disturbance and enrichment of the soils, Ulex-Rubus scrub. Among these mosaics, the Deschampsia grassland is sometimes limited to the margins of well-worn paths or remnants of more open ground where woody plants have not yet got a hold in the rank sward, and periodic fires can help re-instate the community in such situations. Sometimes, the stands are a little more extensive, but throughout there is always a strong floristic continuity among the various vegetation types represented, D. flexuosa itself running on under more open canopies of sub-shrubs and trees, together with herbs like Potentilla erecta and Galium saxatile, and the boundaries between the communities being often dependent upon the extent of the cover of woody plants. Frequently, now, the extent of this regrowth is suffi cient to blur any soil-related patterns in which the Deschampsia grassland is involved, but it can sometimes be seen as a partial replacement for the Calluna-Ulex heath in the sequences of communities over soils that are increasingly impeded. Then it gives way, where there is any strong tendency to gleying, to the Ericetum tetralicis wet-heath on periodically waterlogged peaty profiles. Such conditions are inimical to the survival of D. flexuosa, although where the surrounds of valley mires in this part of Britain have become dry and been burned the community can extend a little further than usual on to such ground. However, where there is any tendency for grass-dominance to develop in such situations west wards of The Weald, Agrostis curtisii usually has the edge on D. flexuosa, and the Deschampsia grassland fades in importance in the extreme oceanic zone. Shifting in the other direction in these edaphic sequences, on to base-poor soils that show a stronger tendency to parching than is usual under the Deschampsia grassland, there can be a local transition to the Festuca-Agrostis- Rumex grassland, usually, in The Weald, of the Poten- tilla-Galium sub-community. In the past, severe rabbitgrazing helped accentuate the contribution from this vegetation over scuffed patches and around burrows. Essentially similar mosaics of grassland, heath and woodland such as characterise The Weald can be found locally through the Midlands in such sites as Sherwood and Delamere Forests and over the higher ground in Cannock Chase, though here the sub-shrub vegetation is represented by the Calluna-Deschampsia heath, a community which shows an even greater floristic continuity with the Deschampsia grassland than does the Calluna-Ulex minor heath. Birch, oak and pine remain the major colonisers of the more open vegetation with Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland eventually establishing itself as the climax forest. With the shift to the upland fringes, some further https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.037 Published online by Cambridge University PressU2 Deschampsia flexuosa grassland 321 changes can be seen in this basic pattern. The Festuca- Agrostis sub-community of the Deschampsia grassland is replaced by the Vaccinium sub-community, and there are similar shifts in both the associated heath and woodland types, with bilberry-rich sub-communities becoming the norm, thus giving a somewhat montane character to the entire sequence of vegetation types. Usually these are disposed over the scarps and valley sides that mark the first substantial rise to the Pennine uplands, the mosaic of communities being again largely dependent on the history of treatments, with a widespread continuance of grazing helping to maintain extensive tracts of the Deschampsia grassland against the spread of sub-shrubs and trees. Patches of grassland and heath can recur at quite high altitudes on the grit edges, though wherever there is a lessening of slope with the shift on to the great shelving dips, poor drainage and the accumulation of ombrogenous peat curtail the extent of these communities. A common pattern is for the Deschampsia grassland to give way to Nardus- Galium grassland on the stagnopodzol intergrades, a zonation which can be interrupted by the occurrence of flushed areas with poor-fen vegetation like grassy Carex-Sphagnum mire, and then for there to be a switch to Calluna-Er iophorum bog. D. flexuosa can run throughout such sequences and, indeed, where blanket peats have been drained, the Deschampsia grassland itself can become established on the drier fringes and ramparts, with a local spread of V. myrtillus where grazing is withdrawn or of the unpalatable E. nigrum ssp. nigrum. The Deschampsia grassland can also figure over the drying surfaces of raised mires with the Erio- phorum bog, though with the shift into more oceanic areas it is Molinia which usually assumes dominance with the loss of waterlogging on the bog surface. Distribution "