"u20","Zonation and succesion The Pteridium-Galium community is a very common and often extensive element in zonations and mosaics with a variety of woodlands, grasslands and heaths. The character of these associated vegetation types reflects https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.055 Published online by Cambridge University PressU20 Pteridium aquilinum-Galium saxatile community 493 the considerable differences in regional and local climate across the wide range of country where this kind of bracken stand has become established, and their disposition frequently reflects variations in treatments subsequent to forest clearance on a range of more free- draining base-poor soils. The Pteridium-Galium community is a particularly successful replacement for woodlands on such ground and the regeneration of good quality pasture or heath presents a major problem. Much bracken-infested land has been planted up for commercial coniferous forestry, but control by the encouragement of natural woodland regeneration has been little tried. Zonations to forest vegetation are widespread throughout the range of the Pteridium-Galium community and often show a continuous gradation in floristics and structure between the bracken stands characteristic of margins and clearings and the closed stretches of woodland. Indeed, in many cases, the differences between the Pteridium-Galium vegetation and the field layers of the adjacent woodland are qualitative ones, evident mainly in the thinning of the bracken and the increased abundance of the ground cover of herbs and bryophytes as shade deepens beneath the canopy of trees. This is particularly striking in the west and north of the country, where the associated woodlands are usually of the Quer eus-Betula-Oxalis or Querus-Betula- Dicranum types, the climax forest communities of more acidic but free-draining mineral soils such as brown earths and podzolised profiles. Bracken can be locally abundant beneath the canopies of oak and birch most typical of these woodlands, with the constants and preferentials of the Anthoxanthum sub-community con tinuing to be important in the field layer of grazed forests of these kinds on more mesotrophic soils, the species of the Vaccinium-Dicranum sub-community figuring pro minently in ungrazed woodlands on rockier and less fertile ground (e.g. Tittensor & Steele 1971). Particularly around the eastern Highlands, the Pteridium-Galium vegetation can also be found in association with Juni- perus-Oxalis and Pinus-Hylocomium woodlands and, again, there is a close similarity between it and the drier and less mesophytic field layers of these communities. Where tracts of woodland are unenclosed, as is usually the case through the upland fringes, the cover of trees around their margins often thins out gradually, though this is generally a reflection of decline in moribund forest fragments, rather than of expansion of young woody growth on to the surrounding bracken- infested land. There are places, however, where a thickening zone of saplings, usually birch or Sorbus aucu- paria, marks the transition from Pteridium-Galium vege tation to newly-developing woodland. And, where the community occurs on stretches of base-poor soils in lowland Britain, it is very commonly found in mosaics with young scrubby woodland, and also with overgrown heath, as on commons where traditional management has fallen into disuse (Tansley 1939, Wooldridge & Goldring 1953, Tubbs 1986, Webb 1986). In this part of the country, with its drier, warmer climate, it is the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland that is the most usual forest type found in association with the Pteridium-Galium community, once more often grading con tinuously to it. More mesotrophic brown soils, where the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland is the climax, frequently develop bracken infestation, but the vege tation is typically of the Pteridium-Rubus type. This generally has a more mesophytic flora, but it comes close to the Pteridium-Galium community in its Teuer ium sub community and, in the south-east, the two kinds of bracken stand can occur together where there are shifts from less to more fertile soils related to the disposition of different bedrocks or drift or to local eutrophication as on disturbed heaths. Mosaics with Ulex-Rubus scrub, in which bracken is a frequent and locally prominent associate, are also very common in the latter situations, as around abandoned settlements. Very often, heaths and grasslands form part of the vegetation patterns in which the Pteridium-Galium community is found, and indeed these usually predominate as associates of bracken stands in the largely deforested landscape of Britain, the proportions of the vegetation types largely reflecting differences in soils and treatments on the once-wooded ground, with some effects, too, from variations in local climate. Regional climate and contrasts in land-use history from one part of the country to another are also important because, although the Pteridium-Galium community occurs in almost every area of Britain with great uniformity in its floristics, associated grasslands and heaths show great variety in their composition in moving from east to west, south to north and with increasing altitude or exposure to maritime influence. The patterns in which this kind of bracken vegetation occurs are thus multitudinous and can only be outlined here. Beginning in the warm Continental part of the country, like Breckland, where Watt (1936) carried out his studies on pattern and process in bracken vegetation, the Pteridium-Galium community is an important ele ment in mosaics with Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland and Calluna-Festuca heath on the more acidic sandy soils, with Carex arenaria and Carex-Cladonia vege tation figuring on loose, wind-blown material. Here, the Pteridium-Galium stands are usually of the Anthoxanthum sub-community, though a mesophytic element is poorly developed and the major continuity is provided by plants such as Festuca ovina, Agrostis capillaris, Galium saxatile, Luzula campestris, Rumex acetosella and certain of the bryophytes. With the shift into the south-east, very similar patchworks of vegetation occur widely on the commons and heaths around London and in the Home Counties. The https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.055 Published online by Cambridge University Press494 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland retains its representation here on more open ground with summer-parched soils, but the dry heath is often of the Calluna-Ulex minor type (Harrison 1970). This continues to be important among the sub-shrub vegetation of drier acidic soils through central southern England where, in areas like the New Forest and remnants of the Dorset heaths, it occurs widely with Pteridium-Galium stands of all kinds. Increasingly here, though, with the higher rainfall, the calcifuge swards are of the Festuca-Agrostis- Galium type or, where Agrostis curtisii has got a hold on somewhat moister humic soils, of the Agrostis type, with greater floristic continuity with the bracken vegetation. West of Poole, both these communities remain common among bracken stands in south-west England, but the Calluna-Ulex gallii heath replaces the Calluna-U. minor type (Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975) in the mosaics, remaining important with Pteridium-Galium vegetation at lower altitudes right round the coast of Wales (Rodwell 1974) and into the north Midlands. In these regions, too, and northwards around the Scottish coast, bracken stands of this kind can be found in association with Calluna-Scilla heath on the more sheltered sections of sea cliffs of base poor rocks and drift (Malloch 1971, South Gower Coast Report 1981). Through the north Midlands, the fringes of the southern Pennines and across into the North York Moors, the Pteridium-Galium community is found with Calluna- Deschampsia heath and Deschampsia grassland (Elgee 1914, Fidler et al. 1970, Daniels 1983). Here, however, down through Wales and into the fringes of the moorlands of south-west England, can be seen the major shift in the kind of landscape patterns in which Pteridium- Galium vegetation occurs, from lowland commons to upland hill slopes. Stands of the community are here often much more extensive and frequently occupy a distinct physiographic zone, between the improved and more intensive grazing of the valley floors and the unenclosed pasture, heaths and mires of the hill slopes above. Downslope, then, there is often a sudden cut-off to the bracken where assiduous management keeps Cynosurion or more mesophytic Nardo-Galion swards within the limits of enclosure free of the fern. Above, the zonations are more gradual, the bracken thinning as the soils become more shallow and rocky or where the surrounding grasslands or heaths have not yet been invaded. The most widespread calcifuge sward in these patterns is the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, the major plagioclimax pasture of free-draining base-poor soils throughout the north and west, but Nardus-Galium grassland also becomes very important where there is some impedence on the slopes around, and, as with the Pteridium-Galium community, the spread of this vegetation is a strong indication of poor pastoral treatment. Accompanying these swards, there is very often some Calluna-Vactinium heath or, in more oceanic areas, Calluna-Erica heath with Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath at higher altitudes. Species such as F. ovina, A. capillaris, Anthoxanthum, Nardus, G. saxatile, P. erecta, V. myrtillus, Calluna and the pleurocarpous mosses are a more or less constant feature of much of this vegetation, with differences in the abundance of bracken, the grasses and sub-shrubs providing most of the contrasts. Patterns of this kind, often covering huge areas, are a very familiar feature of most parts of upland Britain (Eddy et al. 1969, Ward et al. 19T2a,b, Meek 1976, Evans et al. 1977, Hill & Evans 1978). Here, too, Pteridium-Galium vegetation is frequently found closely juxtaposed with mire communities of various kinds. Even in the south-east, bracken stands of this type can occur on the more free-draining ground around Ericetum wet heath and Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bog, but these communities are local. To the north and west, soligenous mires become very common below flushes and in water-tracks gathering run-off from the slopes, and frequently form an abrupt interruption running down through stretches of Pteridium-Galium vegetation (Ward et al. \912a,b, Lee et al. 1986, Brown & Wathern 1986). Typically, this vegetation is of the Carex-Sphagnum type, though often rush-dominated, and marking out ground which is far too wet for bracken to survive. More gradual transitions can be seen where Juncus-Galium rush-pasture is interposed between the mire and surrounding grasslands and bracken. Elsewhere in the north and west, Pteridium-Galium vegetation runs up gentle, free-draining slopes towards stretches of wet heath and blanket bog on ombrogenous peats of benches and plateaus. Again, boundaries are clearly marked here if the peats are wet and actively growing: indeed, there is often a zone of wet heath interposed between the bracken and the mire vegetation. But where the bog surface has dried out, naturally or as a result of drainage, Pteridium can encroach on to the peats occurring among mosaics of Scirpus-Erica heath and Scirpus-Eriophôrum or Calluna-Eriophorum blanket mire, with tracts of Molinia-Potentilla mire running down over slopes that remain moist but free-draining. To maintain and exert itself in all these very varied contexts, bracken must obviously be a resourceful plant. It is clearly a replacement for forest vegetation in most situations, but beyond this we know very little more about its competitive and serai relationships with the vegetation it invades than those features described by Watt from the rather unusual climatic conditions of Breckland. Watt ’s (1945, 1947«,Z?) account of cyclical change in bracken populations may not be universally applicable (Lee et al. 1986), although Marrs & Hicks (1986) have recently confirmed extensive natural degeneration of dense bracken to grass-heath, the Fes tuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland of this scheme, at https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.055 Published online by Cambridge University PressU20 Pteridium aquilinum-Galium saxatile community 495 Lakenheath Warren. At the same time, however, they showed that the phasic interdigitation of Pteridium- Galium vegetation with Calluna-Festuca heath, bracken and heather advancing and retreating over the ground in an overall state of balance (Watt 1955), had broken down with succession proceeding towards brackendominance. The reasons for this change, though, are not clear and may relate more to alterations in grazing, with reductions in both rabbit and sheep populations since the time of Watt ’s work. The prospect of waiting for natural and perhaps only temporary declines in bracken populations is a dismal one for those concerned with the urgent need to maintain the quality of pastures and heaths, and considerable attention has been given to the possibilities of reconstituting swards and sub-shrub vegetation after artificial clearance of Pteridium. Indeed, the necessity of adequate, aftercare for treated land is a vital part of judicious control (Robinson 1986, Soper 1986, Horsnail 1986), and rarely does the death of the fern reveal the kind of lush grazing that some seem to think lies beneath their bracken. Immediate developments depend on the kind of herbicide treatment and on the plants initially present in the bracken understorey or with seed sources near at hand, recolonisation sometimes being strongly related to vegetative survivors (Sparke 1982, Sparke & Williams 1986), in other cases to soil seed stores or nearby seed-parents (Lowday 1986). Asulam is more specific for bracken than is, for example, glyphosate, although even with the former, early stages in revegetation may be dominated by plants like Digitalis, Cir sium spp., Urtica or Rumex acetosella, able to take rapid advantage of newly-cleared ground, and wherever particular elements of the understorey are important to conserve it is necessary to resort to a laborious method of directed application such as a rope-wick technique (Lowman 1985). Subsequent developments in swards are partly dependent on the extent of bracken regrowth and partly on the style of grazing: where Pteridium does not reassert itself continuance of the same pattern of grazing has been shown to favour predominance of grasses over dicotyledons, although shifts in their pro portions, such as the demise of Agrostis spp. with glyphosate spraying, or the local abundance of Holcus mollis, can persist long (Sparke & Williams 1986). Surface treatments, such as the raking off, burning or incorporation of the bracken litter, may also have an effect, because some species are unable to grow over a thick blanket of decaying fronds, while others are stimulated to germinate by disturbance of stored seed (Cadbury 1976, Sparke 1982, Sparke & Williams 1986). More vigorous aftercare, with burning of litter, application of lime and phosphate and re-seeding, can result in the establishment of a good quality artificial sward (Sparke & Williams 1986).Removal of litter after spraying has also been shown to be beneficial for the re-establishment of Calluna on bracken-infested lowland heaths, although in experiments in Breckland, invasion of Betula pendula from buried seed and nearby trees was rapid too, and seen as a possible threat to the regeneration of sub-shrub vegetation (Lowday 1986). The possibilities of controlling bracken itself by stim ulating renewed succession to forest have not escaped notice. Indeed, the Pteridium-Galium community fre quently occupies soils which remain above average in their potential for tree growth, planting not usually necessitating ploughing or draining, although of course it is often necessary to hold back the shading or swamping fronds by cutting or herbicide treatment until the saplings are tall and robust enough to grow clear (Helliwell 1986). Many stands of this kind of vegetation thus persist within and around tracts of commercial forests, invariably coniferous, through the upland fringes, grading into the field layers wherever the shade is not too dense. Natural regeneration among bracken may also be more likely than at first sight (Watt 1976). It was one of the surprises of the study of Marrs & Hicks (1986) that, at Lakenheath, Pinus sylvestris had invaded and grown to maturity since 1946 not only among sparse Pteridium-Galium vegetation, but also where the cover was dense, the major limit on pine spread apparently being seed dispersal. Such results will perhaps help us regain a view of bracken as originally a pioneer plant, serai to forest, and they hold out one hope of natural control (Page 1986). Distribution "