"u21","Zonation and succession The Cryptogramma-Deschampsia community is typi cally found with lithophyte vegetation and heaths in the early stages of succession on talus and boulders of hard, acidic rocks. The progression of the sere can be set back in any stage by shifting of the detritus but, even where it advances far, the influence of grazing or burning generally prevents the establishment of forest, deflecting the succession to plagioclimax pasture or heath, which communities now usually occupy the bulk of the stabilised slopes around stands of the community. Epilithic lichen assemblages, generally grouped in the Leprarion chlorinae or Lecideion tumidae alliances according to whether they comprise shade or sun species (James et al. 1977), are often the first colonisers of the surfaces of the kinds of rocks among which the Cryptogramma-Deschampsia community eventually develops, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.056 Published online by Cambridge University PressU21 Cryptogramma crispa-Deschampsia flexuosa community 501 and they can persist in mosaics with this vegetation over any remaining exposed rocks. Then, there are rocksurface bryophytes, notably Andreaea rupestris and Racomitrium fasciculare, which also make an early appearance though these do not seem to provide a congenial surface for subsequent invaders and cannot really be considered to play an active part in succession. They may, however, persist long. Other mosses, such as Racomitrium heterostichum and Dicranella heteromalla, may play a subsidiary role in helping to disintegrate mineral material but it is only with the appearance of the pioneers of sheltered crevices, notably Diplophyllum, that the progression to the Cryptogramma-Deschampsia community can be really seen as initiated. Developments beyond the establishment of the community depend first on the stability of the substrate and, indeed, in many cases, the sere is repeatedly set back by slipping of the talus or tumbling of boulders on to the vegetation. But where this does not happen, the natural successor to the Cryptogramma-Deschampsia community is probably some kind of heath. Calluna, E. cinerea and V. myrtillus can all invade stabilised patches of this vegetation and, where competition from these and vigorously growing grasses becomes severe, Cryptogramma suffers and eventually dies out. Towards lower altitudes and particularly in more oceanic regions, the Calluna-Erica heath can succeed the fern vegetation with the Calluna- Vaccinium heath favouring the cooler, more humid environment of higher altitudes and shaded aspects, the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath becoming important towards the uppermost limit of this community’s range. Where such vegetation types develop among existing Cryptogramma-Deschampsia stands, species such as D. flexuosa, F. ovina, Anthoxanthum, Agrostis spp., Nardus and Galium saxatile all provide a strong floristic continuity, but the sub-shrubs become dominant and among them there is often an increase in bulky pleurocarpous mosses or lichens at the expense of the smaller acrocarps represented among the fern patches. Within the forest zone, the natural climax of such a succession is the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland and young saplings of the characteristic tree species of this community, Betula pubescens and Sorbus aucuparia in particular, with Quercus petraea occurring more rarely, can sometimes be found invading stable stretches of scree. This is a rare phenomenon, though, partly because of the scarcity of seed-parents over many upland slopes, but also because of the virtually ubiquitous occurrence of grazing. Subsequent succession beyond the Cryptogramma-Deschampsia community, then, is likely to be deflected to swards like the Festuca- Agrostis-Galium grassland, where the fine-leaved grass associates of the fern beds become the dominant element in the vegetation. Or, where burning also plays some part in the land management, Cö//wwö-dominated stands of the heaths may be more or less permanently maintained and mosaics of such grassland and heaths often make up much of the closed vegetation around open screes where the Cryptogramma-Deschampsia community persists. A further important element in such patterns is Pteridium-Galium vegetation, a very widespread community now where colluvial soils have been cleared of forest through the upland fringes, and one which is able to invade up screes where these are reasonably stable, overwhelming such stands of Cryptogramma- Deschampsia vegetation as occur there. Distribution "