"u3","Zonation and succession The Agrostis grassland is a treatment-derived replacement for various heath communities that characteristically occur in zonations of sub-shrub and mire vege tation developed in relation to drainage impedence, often with bracken, sometimes with other grasslands, scrub and woodland reflecting different responses to particular histories of burning, grazing and disturbance. Generally, at lower altitudes, it is found as a local, and often temporary, element on the sequences of communities around valley mires. On higher ground, it can also form part of the fringing zone of grasslands and heaths around the blanket bog of the summits, and here it may become a more permanent component of upland pasture. The particular communities involved in the lowland sequence vary according to the locality. In the New Forest, where the classic pattern of valley-mire vege tation types described by Rose (1953) can still be widely seen around the elongated hollows eroded into the cover of sands and gravel, the Agrostis grassland is usually found as a replacement for stretches of the Ulex minor- Agrostis heath, sandwiched between the Calluna-U. minor heath of sharply-draining podzols and the Erice- tum tetralicis on seasonally-waterlogged soils. In the former direction, A. curtisii can extend some little way if there is local impedence in profiles with much clay below or an iron pan; in the latter, it is quickly extinguished, except where slight soligenous influence ameliorates the lack of aeration, though then Molinia can out-compete it. Full sequences, in which the zonation continues downslope into the Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bog, occur on Cranesmoor, Denny, Holmsley and Wilverley bogs (Newbould 1960, Ratcliffe 1977, Tubbs 1986), but extensive patchworks of the heaths with Agrostis grassland are to be seen over the terraces and undulating lower ground of the southern part of the forest (Lambert & Manners 1964, Fisher 1975 a,Z?), with deposits of Brick Earth providing a particularly congenial substrate for the grass to get a firm hold (Tubbs 1986). Moving westwards, the New Forest pattern is repeated in its essential features, though on not nearly so extensive a scale, on the Hartland-Arne and Studland- Godlingston heaths, the largest remnants of the once extensive continuation of heathland vegetation around Poole (N. W. Moore 1962, Webb 1986). Then, with the move on to the next most important area of this kind of vegetation, on the Devonsire Pebble-Bed commons, the Ulex minor-Agrostis heath is replaced by the Ulex gallii- Agrostis heath as the usual progenitor of the Agrostis grassland, with the Calluna- U. gallii heath appearing as the characteristic dry sub-shrub community in the sequence. Aylesbeare Common has some good zonations of this kind (Ivimey-Cook et al. 1975), with the interesting complication of soligenous Schoenus-Narth- ecium mire along soakways, and Cirsio-Molinietum and Molinia-Potentilla mire over the lightly-flushed slopes around. In these kinds of system, the base-enrichment is usually very slight and dependent on sub-surface drainage from limy strata. On The Lizard, however, the Agrostis grassland can be found as a replacement for the U. gallii-Agrostis heath in close juxtaposition with vege tation whose character is determined by the serpentine and gabbro which give rise to soils that are lime-poor but base-rich. Here, the community and its heath progenitor mark out patches of loess and Crousa Gravels that mask the influence of the underlying bedrocks. Over the deeper deposits, E. vagans cannot grow but, where the drift cover thins, there can be some striking vegetation transitional to the E. vagans-Schoenus heath of the gleyed profiles developed from the igneous parent materials (Coombe & Frost 1956 a, Hopkins 1983). A.curtisii can also gain a locally dominant hold in loess- contaminated soils transitional to the free-draining brown earths which, around the cliff-top margins of The Lizard, have the other endemic sub-shrub community of the area, the E. vagans-U. europaeus heath (Hopkins 1983). Moving to the wetter and cooler climate of the high ground in the South-West Peninsula, the U. gallii- Agrostis heath continues a strong representation around the fringes of Dartmoor, Bodmin Moor and Exmoor and, together with derived stretches of Agrostis grassland, it can be found around the topogenous hollows and their associated water-tracks that drain radially from the summits. Here, though, there tends to be a shift in the whole character of the vegetation towards the sub montane with some kind of Scirpus-Erica wet heath replacing the Ericetum tetralicis on the wetter ground or rush-dominated Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire along soakways. Then, towards drier ground, it is bilberry https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.038 Published online by Cambridge University Press328 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities rather than gorse which often provides the most obvious floristic continuity from the Agrostis grassland to the dry sub-shrub vegetation, which is here often represented by the Calluna-Vaccinium heath occurring on brown podzolic soils and rankers, frequently on steep rocky slopes. Also here, though, the Agrostis grassland and the U. gallii-Agrostis heath can be seen as part of the larger- scale zonation which runs, in crudely concentric fashion, around the blocks of higher ground. Above, on intergrade stagnopodzols and stagnohumic gleys developed over the edge of the summit plateaus, there is a transition to Scirpus-Erica wet heath and then, over the deeper ombrogenous peat, to Scirpus-Eriophorum blanket mire. This kind of pattern is best developed over Dartmoor and well illustrated in the map and descriptions of Ward et al (1972zz), though less extensive and clear zonations can also be seen over the other major upland areas of the south-west. The clarity of definition of the Agrostis grassland among the heaths which immediately give rise to it and the neighbouring sub-shrub communities is largely a function of the treatment the vegetation has received. The impact of a recent burn or the effect of a sharp grazing boundary can be very clear, with an abrupt switch in dominance from the grass to the particular assemblage of sub-shrubs, but often the zonations are much less well defined, where recovery from burning is well advanced or where grazing is light or sporadic. In previous accounts, ‘grass-heath ’ categories have sometimes been devised to cater for difficult intermediates or fine mosaics (Ward et al-. 1912a, Tubbs 1986) and, in this scheme, the U. minor-Agrostis, U. gallii-Agrostis and E. vagans-Ulex heaths all have sub-communities in which A. curtisii is especially abundant in relation to the woody plants: it should always be remembered that variation among these elements is virtually continuous. Then, there are other developments which can supervene as a result of the perturbations produced by different treatments and these can complicate the basic patterns described above. In the first place, on soils which are a little moister than usual, but well aerated, a situation often associated with some slight sub-surface through-put in heaths on sloping ground, Molinia often has a better start in regeneration than has A. curtisii. Although this grass is much more palatable than the bent, indeed it often provides the best early bite of all in burned heaths, it too can quickly become abundant after fires. Stands in which the grasses are co-dominant can still be included here but, where Molinia is clearly in the ascendancy, the vegetation is best placed in the Anthoxanthum sub-community of the Molinia-Potentilla mire. This can frequently be found with stands of the Agrostis grassland and many of the herbaceous associates are the same, the boundary between the communities being often dependent on the relative abundance of the two grasses. Nardus stricta, on the other hand, which is so abundant in poor-quality grazings over the ill-drained upland areas through Wales and northern Britain, does not seem to present much challenge to A. curtisii in some parts of the south-west, notably Dartmoor, even on the peaty intergrades. It has been suggested that this is because the plant is kept in check by a diversity of grazing stock, particularly by the ponies which bite the heart out of the tufts (Havinden & Wilkinson 1970, Ward et al. 1912a). A second development can be seen where the soils are well drained but somewhat more base-rich than is usual where A. curtisii flourishes. Then, after burning or under the influence of long, hard grazing alone, grasses such as Festuca ovina, Agrostis capillaris and Anthoxanthum can become co-dominant in a Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland. Sometimes, such swards develop on distinct patches of brown earth soils, perhaps maintained by flushing, as over the highest northern terraces of the New Forest, or where the stretches of heath abut on to stream sides, woodland margins, roadside verges or the edges of settlements where pH can remain low but where there is some measure of enrichment from flooding, leaf fall and dunging. A. curtisii sometimes persists in such grasslands but only in small amounts and the distinction between the communities is often clear, particularly where more mesophytic grasses and dicotyledons get a hold. In the New Forest, this kind of vegetation makes up the best grazing on the drier ‘lawns ’, where liming has been used in some places to enhance the quality of the herbage further, with the development of particularly rich Lolio-Cynosuretum and Lolio-Plantaginetum grasslands (Tubbs 1986). Although of highly artificial origin, these vegetation types form a very interesting local series grading continuously into Agrostis grassland. Around the upland fringes, such diversity is uncommon but, on Dartmoor, the Agrostis grassland occurs widely in mosaics with Festuca-Agrostis-Galium swards on brown podzolic soils and it can sometimes be difficult to distinguish the two (Tansley 1939, Ward et al. 1912a). Where more mesotrophic brown earths with these grasslands have had some modest disturbance, Ulex europaeus often invades and patches of Ulex-Rubus scrub, developing where grazing is light, often mark out old (sometimes very old) field boundaries and settlements among stretches of Agrostis grassland. On deeper soils with free drainage, though, a more likely development after fires or where sheep alone are grazed, is for bracken to spread. A. curtisii can persist under a quite dense cover of the fronds (Ivimey-Cook 1959) but, where invasion is very vigorous, as over stoneless colluvial soils, the Pteridium-Galium community becomes established. Cutting can push back the succession and, combined with grazing, particularly if heavier-tramphttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.038 Published online by Cambridge University PressU3 Agrostis curtisii grassland 329 ling cattle and ponies are used, re-establish Agrostis grassland (Tubbs 1986). Distribution "