"u4","Zonation and succession Through the open grazings of the sub-montane west and north of Britain, the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland can be found with a great variety of other grasslands, heaths and mires, in diverse patchworks that reflect differences in regional climate across its wide range, and variations in soils and treatments over particular stretches of hills. Grazing is of prime importance in preventing the regression of the community to woody vegetation and, though it is possible that towards its very highest limits some stands would revert to climax heath, most would be succeeded by scrub and woodland if treatment ceased. In altitudinal sequences, then, this is a community of the forest zone and sub-alpine transition, limited above by the harsh climate and now curtailed below by enclosure and improvement. The Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland makes its maximum contribution to upland rough grazings on the well-drained, acidic soils characteristic of steeper slopes underlain by lime-poor substrates, and some of the commonest zonations in which it is seen are related to shifts from these favoured geological, topographic and edaphic conditions, particularly as they affect the moisture regime, base-status and trophic state of the soils. For example, the community often extends on to shal low rankers, provided these are not disposed among boulders or on ledges inaccessible to grazing stock, where shrubs and trees can invade, but where there is any tendency for such soils to become parched in dry weather, the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland is usually replaced by more fragmentary swards of the Thero-Airion type. Such transitions are best seen over small, fractured rock outcrops around the drier southern and eastern fringes of the uplands (Jarvis 1974, Sinker et al. 1985, Hughes & Huntley 1986), though they persist locally in wetter regions on warmer, south-facing slopes (Birse 1980), and they often involve a switch to the Festuca-Agrostis-Rumex grassland. In such situations, the thinning and increased droughtiness of the soil cover is marked by a change to a more open and tussocky turf, lacking such species as Anthoxanthum, Potentilla erecta, Luzula campestris and Viola riviniana, together with the bulky pleurocarpous mosses, but gaining plants like Rumex acetosella, Air a praecox, Poa annua and other ephemerals, Sedum anglicum and acro carpous mosses. Much more extensive and important, though, are those patterns related to increased moisture of the soil, which can be a function of higher precipitation and runoff, flushing or drainage impedence. Sometimes the changes are fairly subtle, relating to a slight lessening of slope and accumulation of downwashed colluvial material, when the deeper and better integrated profiles can be marked just by a shift from Typical Festuca- Agrostis-Galium grassland to the more mesophytic Hol cus-Trifolium sub-community. A similar change, sometimes amounting to little more than a rise in the fre quency of H. lanatus, T. repens, Achillea millefolium and Cerastium fontanum, can accompany the move from arenaceous parent materials to more argillaceous ones, quite a slight increase of clay in the profile being sufficient to slow down leaching, raise the base-status a little and improve the texture. Such patterns can be seen where the sandstones are replaced by shales in sequences of Devonian, Silurian and Carboniferous rocks such as underlie much of south-west England, Wales and the Southern Uplands, the change in geology often being matched by a shift from steeper and craggier slopes to more gentle ground. Or, where slopes lessen, there can be smears of clayey drift which mask the controlling influence of pervious sandstones. In all these cases, the move from shedding towards receiving drainage helps confirm the lithological influence of the parent materials. Very commonly, however, the impedence of run-off in situations like this is such as to effect a more marked floristic change. Characteristically, over the lower ground through the uplands, high rainfall and water shed from surrounding hills induces surface-water gley ing over impermeable substrates on gentle slopes, brown earths or podzolised profiles being replaced by stagno- gleys or where, in impeded hollows, there is some shallow fluctuation of the water-table, by ground-water gleys. Then, the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland typically gives way to the Juncus-Galium mire, physiog- nomically a rush-pasture, dominated by clumps of J. acutiflorus or J. effusus, and with such Molinietalia associates as Galium palustre, Cirsium palustre, Lotus uliginosus, Ranunculusflammula and Angelica sylvestris. Sometimes, where the underlying edaphic differences are sharp, the floristic junctions are correspondingly abrupt, but where it is drift that is the primary control on drainage, then the changes are much more gradual. Boundaries can be further blurred where, as is usually the case, stock have access, when an ill-defined mosaic of vegetation types is produced among the clumps of unpalatable rushes. Receiving most of the attention of the grazing stock, the swards between get a concentration of dung and then a Cynosurion element can become prominent in the transition, with the Holcus- Trifolium sub-community surrounding the clumps of rush-pasture and giving way on steeper slopes to Typical Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland. There can be a marked drift of more mesophytic plants in such situa- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.039 Published online by Cambridge University Press342 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities tions, with species like Festuca rubra, H. lanatus and T. repens well represented throughout. Very often, too, patchworks of this kind have been further improved by draining of the wetter ground, with the consequent expansion of the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, the application of artificials like basic slag helping to maintain higher fertility and favouring the Holcus-Trifolium sub-community. Much pasture upgraded in this way has been taken in towards the limits of enclosure and sometimes given more assiduous improvement, but neg lect can allow quite rapid reversion to a rush-pasture mosaic where the drains become blocked, and the toing and froing of land around the fringes of the uplands between these vegetation types is often a reflection of the state of the agricultural economy. Mixtures of the communities figure prominently in the pastures des cribed from the Cheviots by King (1962; see also King & Nicholson 1964) and very extensive tracts occur over the undulating foothills of central Wales and the Southern Uplands. Gleyed mineral soils of the kinds which support these transitions from the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland to the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture can readily accumulate a humose topsoil in the wetter parts of the country and the resultant humic gleys and stagnohumic gleys are often intergrades to acid peats proper which have built up over benches and plateaus and in waterlogged hollows through western and northern Britain. In some such situations, the zonations described above form just part of extensive vegetation sequences which run on into Ericion wet heath and Erico-Sphagnion blanket mire on thickening ombrogenous peat that has developed over increasingly gentle slopes, running back from scarps to shelving dips, up from steep slopes on to high-altitude plateaus or down to low-level benches. In other cases, the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture forms a transition zone on the gleyed surrounds to water-tracks and flushes running through Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, a common feature where steeper hill slopes channel run off into juvenile streams or where impermeable rocks or drift bring soil waters to the surface within stretches of open pasture. Then, the Juncus-Galium vegetation usually gives way in turn to a strip of rush-dominated Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire over the irrigated peaty soil but grazing and trampling can fret the boundaries of these zonations and maintain patches of grassy sward among clumps of rushes in close juxtaposition with the Sphagnum carpet of the flushed ground. A frequent complication of these kinds of soil-related patterns where the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland occurs among better-aerated peaty profiles at lower altitudes in the western part of its range is the spread of Molinia. In contrast to the Juncus-Galium rush-pasture, the Molinia-Potentilla mire, which contains most of the A/b/zmö-dominated swards in this part of the country, is characteristically associated with areas of quickening drainage through peaty mineral soils and true peats, and it can often be seen among stretches of Festuca-Agrostis- Galium grassland towards the western seaboard of Bri tain, around the heads and sides of moorland streams and fringing soligenous and basin mires (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Ratcliffe & Hattey 1982). In such edaphic and climatic conditions, Molina can be very vigorous, its dominance marking out the boundary between one vegetation type and the other quite clearly, but where the Molinia-Potentilla mire has been burned and grazed, a common practice, continuing predation by stock can maintain fairly short and diverse swards over the peatier soils, and the floristic continuity is then considerable. The Anthoxanthum sub-community of the Molinia- Potentilla mire, for example, has frequent Anthoxanthum, Agrostis capillaris, Festuca rubra, Holcus lanatus and Potentilla erecta, and occurs very extensively with Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland in Wales and southwest Scotland. Similar vegetation can also be found over shallow ombrogenous peats where wet heath has been transformed into grassy Molinia mire by burning and grazing. In the cool and wet conditions at higher altitudes, the spread of Nardus presents a different complication to the picture. This grass is of varying frequency through the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland and its abundance is always strongly influenced by the treatments which the swards have received. But edaphically, it competes least well on the well-drained moder and mull soils characteristic of the Typical and Holcus-Trifolium sub-communities, rather better on some of the cold humic gleys that, in the western Highlands, can carry the Luzula-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community, and best of all on profiles which combine a humose topsoil with a strongly-leached and oligotrophic mineral base, often gleyed (e.g. Pearsall 1968). In some of the transitions already mentioned, Nardus can increase its cover where there is a tendency for such soils to develop, so that a zone of Nardus- Galium grassland becomes interposed in the sequences: this can happen over much-trampled transitions between the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland and Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire towards higher alti tudes, where the community gives way to ill-drained stretches of Molinia-Potentilla mire, and where, over redistributed peat washed down from above, there is a zonation to run-down wet heath and blanket mire (e.g. Smith 1918). Very frequently, too, Nardus spreads within the Vaccinium-Deschampsia sub-community where it extends on to humic stagnopodzols, a common feature on drift-smeared slopes at higher altitudes, and then there can be a patchy mosaic of Festuca-Agrostis- Galium and Nardus-Galium grasslands. In such situations, the latter community is often readily picked out in winter by the abundant bleached herbage of the mat https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.039 Published online by Cambridge University PressU4 Festuca ovina-Agrostis capillaris-Galium saxatile grassland 343 grass but the two vegetation types have many associates in common: Festuca ovina, Agrostis capillaris, Des champsia flexuosa, Potentilla erecta, Galium saxatile, Vaccinium myrtillus and pleurocarpous mosses all provide strong continuity through the swards. It has been suggested (Heddle & Ogg 1936, Fenton 1937, Harris 1939) that the spread of Nardus into the Festuca- Agrostis-Galium grassland in situations such as these is a consequence of the historical switch from cattle to sheep as the major grazing stock and, more recently, from wethers to the more selective breeding ewes (Roberts 1959, Grant et al. 1985). Where Nardus is becoming entrenched, it may thus now require densities of sheep to control it which are unacceptably high for the continued health of the better-quality Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland (Nicholson et al. 1970), such that the mat grass continues its advance or becomes firmly entrenched in sharply-defined mosaics. In all of the zonations described so far, there is generally a marked poverty of bases in all the soils, but different kinds of pattern can be seen where this situation is relieved, either by some change in parent materials or by irrigation of the profiles by lime-rich waters. Through most of its range, the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland is replaced in such circumstances by the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland, a community with which it shares many catholic and mildly calcifuge herbs, but where there is fairly consistent enrichment with plants such as Thymus praecox, Carex panicea, C. pulicaris, Selaginella selaginoides and calcicolous bryophytes. The two vegetation types come closest over drier soils, as where there is a change from brown earths of low base-status to those with a higher pH and calcium content where, say, limy partings occur among base deficient shales or a drift cover thins over native calcareous rocks: then, the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland is usually represented by the Trifolium-Luzula sub community which can grade almost imperceptibly into Typical Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland or the Hol cus-Trifolium sub-community. More striking patterns are to be seen around base-rich flushes where, within the space of a few metres, there can be a transition from Typical Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland over the unirrigated sopes, through the Carex sub-community of the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland to a Caricion davallianae mire on a calcareous gley, with perhaps a Cratoneurion spring at its head. At moderate altitudes through the northern part of the range of the Festuca- Agrostis-Galium grassland, the small-sedge mire vege tation in such zonations is usually of the Pinguiculo- Caricetum type, with the Carici-Saxifragetum replacing it in stony flushes over higher ground. At higher alti tudes, too, over moderately base-rich mulls through the Scottish Highlands, the Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath can figure in such sequences. Alchemilla alpina and T. praecox are good indicators of transitions to this kind of vegetation with, in moister situations, basiphilous small sedges but, again, there can be con siderable floristic continuity through the swards. With the move southwards into the Craven district, it is the Sesleria-Galium grassland that constitutes the more calcicolous element in grassland patchworks of this type, marking out extensive stretches of calcareous lithomorphic soils, with the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland limited to places where surface leaching of native profiles is more pronounced or where the influence of the underlying bedrock is masked by light- textured drift. A comparable situation pertains in the Derbyshire Dales, towards the south-eastern limit of the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, although here the climate is sufficiently warm and dry for the Festuca- Avenula grassland to occupy the rendzina soils on the steeper valley sides, with the distinctive Lathyrus- Stachys sub-community of the more calcifuge grassland marking out the loess-contaminated soils on the brow tops (Balme 1953, Pigott 1962, Grime 1963«,/?). More natural sequences here can run on into the Vaccinium- Deschampsia sub-community with D. flexuosa showing a tendency to invade and acidify the shallower and less base-poor soils and consequently modifying the floristics and structure of the Lathyrus-Stachys sub-community (Grime 1963&, Pigott 1970«) but, in many places, the deeper soils of the plateau have been improved so that, beyond a field boundary, there is often a sharp change to the Holcus-Trifolium sub-community or a Cynosurion sward. In all these patterns, grazing is usually the major factor in preventing the reversion of the Festuca- Agrostis-Galium grassland and the other plagioclimax swards with which it occurs to the different kinds of forest from which they were, in the main, originally derived. The effects of a reduction in grazing pressure are widely seen among tracts of the community where the ground becomes naturally less accessible to the stock, as where there are tumbles of blocky talus over the slopes, or where crags and ravines interrupt the land scape, although in such places the change in topography often affects soil development and climate, so that the transitions to lush herbaceous or woody vegetation seen there are usually of complex origin. More obviously serai are those situations where stock have been temporarily or permanently withdrawn from the open pastures, reflecting the fate of local farming enterprises or the vicissitudes of the agricultural economy as a whole, with a neglect of the grazings or enclosure for alternative purposes such as forestry or water resource management. In fact, the continuing high value of the betterquality elements among our rough pastures, like the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, means that such opportunities for succession are fairly scarce. Where https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.039 Published online by Cambridge University Press344 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities they do occur, the first invaders are often birch, usually Betula pubescens but with B. pendula locally prominent in some places, as through parts of east-central Scot land, and Sorbus aucuparia, with pines frequently seed ing in from plantations, and oaks, generally Quercus petraea but locally Q. robur, sometimes coming in later (Pearsall & Pennington 1973). On the more base-poor and rocky soils supporting the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, such species would probably eventually come to dominate in the kind of vegetation we see in the Quer eus-Betula-Dicranum woodland, the field layer of which can present virtually identical mixtures of plants to those found here in the Vaccinium-Deschampsia sub community and some of the more unremittingly calcifuge Typical stands. Over less impoverished soils on to which the grassland extends, where Corylus avellana or even Crataegus monogyna can sometimes be found among the early colonisers after withdrawal of grazing, the serai trend is probably towards the Quercus-Betula- Oxalis woodland, a forest type whose herbaceous ele ment is akin to the more mesophytic Festuca-Agrostis- Galium swards, such as are included in the Typical, Holcus-Trifolium and Luzula-Rhytidiadelphus sub communities. Both these woodland communities are widespread through the northern and western sub montane zone of Britain and can often be seen in close association with the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, though not commonly in active successional development from it. More commonly, the woodlands occur as an enclosed element in the landscape towards the lower altitudinal limits of the grassland or extend up through it in fragmentary fashion in inaccessible ravines. Or, they are open to the stock, offering valuable sheltered grazing in hard weather and often being in the later stages of conversion back to pasture after a period of enclosure for coppicing, rarely practised now: such woodlands, with their characteristically grassy field layers, are often essentially Festuca-Agrostis-Galium swards with a canopy of over-mature trees. Even where there are reductions in grazing of Festuca- Agrostis-Galium grassland, however, the progression to woodland is by no means assured. In the first place, seed parents of some important potential invaders, like the oaks, are very scarce through much of the sub-montane zone. Others, like the birches and pines, whose seed is numerous and widely dispersed by the wind, need an open well-lit turf for establishment, and suitable con ditions can be very short-lived before the development of a rank tussocky sward precludes further establishment. Then, there is the possibility of expansion of sub shrubs previously held in check but readily able to form a heathy cover in which trees can get a hold only with difficulty. Calluna and V. myrtillus can both be found with varying degrees of frequency as sparse sprigs in the sward and can become important dominants in heaths developed from Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland with, less commonly, Ulex minor, U. gallii, Erica cinerea and Empetrum nigrum ssp. nigrum playing a part in various parts of the range. Through the sub-montane zone, the community is found very commonly in mosaics with various kinds of heath, the balance between burning and grazing playing a controlling role in determining their proportions as plagioclimax replacements for forest and the direction of successional shifts between them. The Calluna-Ulex minor heath in the New Forest and around Poole Harbour towards the south-eastern climatic limit of the Festuca-Agrostis- Galium grassland, the Calluna-Ulexgallii heath at lower altitudes through the south-west of England and Wales, the Calluna-Erica cinerea heath in the western parts of Scotland, the Calluna-Scilla heath around the maritime fringe, the Calluna- Vaccinium heath in the less oceanic parts of the sub-montane zone and the Calluna- Deschampsia heath through the polluted southern Pen- nines -all these can occur in patchworks with or gradations to the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland and some of them have distinct sub-communities representing spatial or serai transitions to it. Towards its highest altitudinal limits, the community can also be found with the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath and it is possible that, just beyond the forest zone, this is an original precursor to high-level stands. Another shrub which commonly features in Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland towards lower altitudes is Ulex europaeus and transitions to patches of Ulex-Rubus scrub often mark out the sites of old settlements or disturbed boundary banks in tracts of the pasture, pathways through it or enclosures which have passed in and out of intensive use for grazing. The other highly significant development which can supervene in the regression of neglected Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland is the spread of Pteridium aquilinum. Typically, through the sub-montane zone, this fern grows most vigorously on colluvial soils, over which it is abundant in the two kinds of woodland from which the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland has commonly deve loped. Many of the slope-foot stands of dense Pteri- dium-Galium vegetation to be seen today throughout the unenclosed rough grazings of the uplands no doubt derive directly from the field layers of cleared forest, but bracken has increased its extent very considerably through what were once open pastures. Changes in treatment are certainly partly to blame for this: bracken is no longer cut as it once was for bedding, and the shift towards grazing almost exclusively with sheep means that the advancing fronts of fronds no longer get the heavy trampling that cattle used to give them. Transitions between the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland and the Pteridium-Galium vegetation can be very gra dual, and species such as Potentilla erecta, Galium https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.039 Published online by Cambridge University PressU4 Festuca ovina-Agrostis capillaris-Galium saxatile grassland 345 saxatile and Dicranum scoparium can run on sparsely under quite dense covers of fronds, but much pasture with bracken is virtually useless once the annual cover of shoots is well grown and the re-establishment of trees where grazing is abandoned completely is well nigh impossible. Distribution "