"u5","Zonation and succession The Nardus-Galium grassland occurs widely through the uplands of northern and western Britain in zonations and mosaics with a variety of other grasslands, heaths and mires, where the major influences on the vegetation patterns are soil differences and treatments. Regional climatic variations across the range of the community affect the particular components of these patchworks and local climatic differences mediate transitions to windswept moss-heath and snow-beds. In most situations, however, the Nardus-Galium grassland is an an thropogenic vegetation type, derived by the burning and grazing of cleared land in the forest zone. Although relaxation of pasturing might allow a ready reversion to heath in many places, the run-down of ground long occupied by the community may hinder any succession to forest at lower altitudes.Some of the clearest edaphically-related zonations involving the Nardus-Galium grassland can be seen where the moist, peaty soils that it favours occur as intergrades between more sharply draining podzols and rankers on steeper, shedding slopes and thicker peats kept moist by heavy rainfall or locally impeded drainage over flatter ground. Quite commonly, such patterns find clear expression in an altitudinal banding with a zone of Nardus-Galium grassland occupying the gentler ground on transitions between the steeper hillsides below and the summit plateaus above, but more complex patterns can be seen over stepped topography or more broken slopes. The zonation over the drier podzols is very often to the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland and, over graded transitions on higher hills, the Vaccinium- Deschampsia sub-community of that vegetation, which has occasional Nardus, can pass almost imperceptibly into Species-poor Nardus-Galium grassland. In other cases, sharper topographical changes from slope to plateau, or scarp to dip, can show a more abrupt zonation of these vegetation types: these sometimes mark geological shifts from resistant pervious bedrocks to softer, impervious ones, as over grit/shale alternations, while elsewhere the deposition of heavy drift sharpens up drainage differences by enhancing impedence over gentler slopes. Then, the sudden change in the abundance of Nardus may provide a much better indication of the boundaries between the communities, the belts and patches of the Nardus-Galium grassland showing up especially clearly in winter, although there is still often considerable qualitative continuity among the associates in the swards. Patterns of these kinds are very widespread through the British uplands, and well illus trated in the account of the Moffat Hills (Smith 1918) and, in more fragmentary fashion, in maps of the Carneddau (Ratcliffe 1959a) and Cader Idris (Edgell 1969). They have been clearly described too from the southern Pennines, although here the swards of the steeper, better-drained ground tend to be of the Des champsia flexuosa type (Adamson 1918), while in the warm oceanic south-west of England such Nardus- Galium grassland as does occur is often found in association with the Agrostis curtisii grassland (e.g. Ward et al. 1972a). In the other direction in edaphic transitions of this kind, the Nardus-Galium grassland often passes to some kind of bog or related vegetation on ombrogenous peat that has accumulated over summit plateaus or high-level terraces. Ultimately, it is blanket mire that usually terminates such sequences, with the Calluna- Eriophorum bog occurring over the flatter summits of the Grampians, the higher ground in the Southern Uplands and down the Pennines, the more oceanic Scirpus-Eriophorum bog being found in association with the community in more westerly parts of Scotland, in https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.040 Published online by Cambridge University PressU5 Nardus stricta-Galium saxatile grassland 359 Wales and the south-west of England. And sometimes the Nardus-Galium grassland can give way abruptly to such vegetation, with little floristic continuity, where the peat mantle becomes suddenly thicker. Often, however, there is an intervening zone with a more gentle transition between the extremes, either over the gradually thickening humose topsoil that eventually passes to deep intact peat, or over redistributed peat eroded from the blanket bog fringe above and washed down over the slopes, this latter a widespread and extensive feature of many upland areas now. In such zonations, the Agrostis- Polytrichum sub-community is often the commonest form of Nardus-Galium grassland and this can grade to Ericion wet heath over thicker peats, the Juncus- Dicranum sub-community of the Ericetum tetralicis figuring widely in these patterns in the east-central Highlands, the Vaccinium sub-community of the more oceanic Scirpus-Erica wet heath being commoner through the Southern Uplands, Wales and the South- West Peninsula. Moving into such vegetation, the grass cover usually becomes patchy, with Scirpus cespitosus and sub-shrubs such as V. myrtillus, Calluna, Empetrum nigrum and Erica tetralix increasing in abundance, and Sphagna like 5. capillifolium, S. compactum, S. subnitens and S. tenellum appearing. In other cases, Dicranum scoparium, Racomtrium lanuginosum, pleurocarpous mosses and various larger lichens can become prominent in these transitions and, over exposed fringes of eroding blanket mire around the western seaboard of Scotland, the Racomitrium sub-community of the Nar dus-Galium grassland can play a locally important part in gradations to wet heath (Ratcliffe 1977). Another very common plant over these intermediate zones of wet but fairly thin peat is Juncus squarrosus, which occurs widely in all proportions with Nardus, either in intimate mix tures or in complicated patchy mosaics with one or the other species dominant. In this scheme, a distinct Jun cus-Festuca grassland subsumes most of the vegetation of this kind in which J. squarrosus is clearly the more abundant plant (cf. Ratcliffe 1959zz, Birks 1973, Birse & Robertson 1976, Birse 1980), but gradations between this and Nardus-Galium grassland, particularly the Agrostis-Poly trichum and Carex-Viola sub-communities, can be complex and virtually continuous (Ratcliffe 1959a, Welch 1967). The Nardus-Galium grassland can also be found as a transitional community where free-draining soils give way to gleys maintained by irrigation from springs or seepage lines, and indeed in regions with very poor rocks such as the quartzites which prevail in parts of the western Highlands, such habitats provide a local but important site for this vegetation among suites of oligotrophic heaths. Much more widely, however, the Nar dus-Galium grassland occurs on peaty gleys around soligenous flushes, the Agrostis-Poly trichum subcommunity often marking out a gradation from drier swards to calcifuge Caricion nigrae vegetation like the Carex echinata-Sphagnum mire, the Carex nigra-Nardus sub-community of which has frequent Nardus, Anthoxanthum, Festuca ovina, Agrostis canina ssp. canina, Juncus squarrosus, Luzula multiflora and Polytrichum commune, as well as Carex echinata, C. nigra, C. demissa, Viola palustris and various Sphagna, most notably S. recurvum, S. auriculatum and 5. palustre. Where the irrigating waters are somewhat more base-rich, as occurs on slopes receiving run-off or seepage from calcareous rocks or drift, the Carex- Viola sub-community usually occurs in these transitional situations, either marking out flushed zones within tracts of more calcifuge Species-poor Nardus-Galium grassland or forming a surround to strongly basiphile mires like the Pingui- culo-Caricetum or, at higher altitudes, the Carici-Saxi- fragetum. Well-developed flushes with this kind of vege tation are usually clearly marked off from their context by their richness in calcicolous small sedges, dicotyledons and bryophytes, but transitional and fragmentary stands can be harder to delineate from the neighbouring swards, especially where the ground is much trampled by stock searching for a nourishing bite. Patterns of this kind are a striking feature of some of the Breadalbane Mountains, as over the slopes of Ben Lawers (Ratcliffe 1977) where McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) grouped some of the more strongly flushed transitions with Nardus in a distinct Hypno-Caricetum. Towards higher altitudes, it becomes difficult to dis tinguish between the Nardus-Galium grassland and the Nardus-Carex vegetation which has been largely unaffected by the burning and grazing prevalent over lower ground and which often has a distinctly chionophilous character. The two communities come closest on north- and east-facing slopes where shade maintains a particularly cool and moist atmosphere and where some prolongation of snow-lie provides shelter from the bit ing winds and an additional source of irrigating waters in late spring. Here, the Racomitrium sub-community, often with a local abundance of Scirpus cespitosus, can provide a surround to Typical Nardus-Carex snow-bed vegetation, a pattern well seen in some of the great corries on Beinn Eighe and certain of the Grampian mountains (Ratcliffe 1977). Almost everywhere else, treatments have interacted with soils and climate to complicate the kinds of vege tation patterns described above. First, there is the general feature that, where pastoral exploitation of hill grazings by choosy stock has been long and heavy, the Nardus-Galium grassland tends to occupy more of the ground in such sequences than would be the case if edaphic factors had exerted a greater control on its abundance, the community becoming deeply entrenched over the most suitable profiles and being at a https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.040 Published online by Cambridge University Press360 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities strong competitive advantage over better-quality swards on soils of a transitional character. Second, over ground of intermediate wetness and impoverishment, there can be seen all manner of fine variation in the composition and structure of the swards where grazing exerts its maximal influence on zonations between the Nardus-Galium grassland and other communities like the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, from sharply- delimited mosaics of close-cropped runnels between Nardus tussocks to much more ill-defined gradations between short and ranker swards. There is probably some measure of successional play in such patterning, whereby the boundaries can be sharpened up or allowed to become less clear with variations in grazing intensity, but because selective cropping tends to confirm the hold of Nardus in the swards, it is doubtful whether increased stocking with choosy animals can ever push back the limits of the Nardus-Galium grassland without imposing unacceptable pressure on the better-quality swards. Less selective stock, such as cattle, ponies and wethers, are probably better for this purpose, the first having the advantage of a heavier tread and more concentrated manuring, which helps break up the rank herbage and raise the fertility of the ground. Milton (1940) showed that controlled heavy grazing, with such dunging and trampling, could reduce the abundance of both Nardus and J. squarrosus in grasslands such as these, though in dense Nardus-Galium swards it is unknown whether the required closeness of grazing can be achieved without the stock suffering nutritional penalties (Nicholson et al. 1970, Grant et al. 1985). Little information is available on the detailed fate of Nardus-Galium grassland from which grazing has been withdrawn apart from the enclosure experiments at Moor House in the northern Pennines (Welch & Rawes 1964, Rawes 1981) and even here the changes are still in train after 20 years or so of protection from sheep and the results somewhat equivocal. But the most obvious indications are that, where Nardus has a strong hold in the swards over highly suitable soils, it declines little, or even increases its abundance, with enclosure, whereas if it is a relatively minor component over profiles that are not so moist and peaty, it declines, being overwhelmed in this case by plants such as Deschampsia flexuosa and Carex bigelowii. Similar observations were made by Ratcliffe (1959zz) on unplanted patches or failed areas within forestry enclosures in Snowdonia, where mixed Nardus, Festuca and Agrostis swards became dominated by D. flexuosa, A. capillaris, V. myrtillus and Calluna. And so it seems likely that, where Nardus is not unduly abundant, and perhaps at some competitive disadvantage once grazing is withdrawn, it is plants that can root in the mat of accumulating litter that are best able to thrive and subdue it. The likely successor to such changes through most of the altitudinal range of the Nardus-Galium grassland would be some sort of Vacci- nium-Deschampsia heath, and indeed this vegetation is frequently found among these swards, sharing many species with them and often grading imperceptibly with changes in dominance that are probably often under biotic control (Ratcliffe 1959a, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, King & Nicholson 1964). At lower altitudes, heather can become important in such patterns, with the Nardus-Galium grassland occurring among Calluna- Vaccinium heath, particularly the Galium-Festuca sub community, or, through the southern Pennines, the Calluna-Deschampsia heath, or, over higher ground in the oceanic south-west of Britain, the Ulex gallii- Agrostis curtisii heath. It seems highly likely that in some regions sub-shrub vegetation of these kinds, rather than other grasslands, were the historical precursors to the Nardus-Galium swards. Certainly, Ratcliffe (1959a) and McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) adduced abundant evidence that repeated burning together with heavy grazing had con verted sub-montane heather communities to bilberry heath, Nardus-Galium and Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grasslands through much of the Southern Uplands, northern England and Wales, and was continuing to do so; and they supposed the same to be true of parts of the Highlands, particularly in the drier south-east Grampian region. And King (1960), from observations in parts of the Southern Uplands, suggested that the development of /Van7w5-dominance might be an intermittent but cumulative process related to the cyclic, but gradually less successful, regrowth of heather with repeated burning, or perhaps just after many generations of natural growth and ageing. It is, however, often impossible to tell whether particular tracts of Nardus-Galium grassland have developed in this secondary fashion or more directly from cleared forest and, in recent times, the latter process may have been the more widespread (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). What is clear is that reversion of the Nardus-Galium grassland to woodland with a relaxation of grazing is often problematic. Quite apart from the rarity of seed parents through much of the sub-montane zone, the thick, litter-choked herbage and peaty mat present a very uncongenial rooting medium for likely invaders such as species of birch and pine whose fruits, though wind-transportable over considerable distances, have but small food reserves to sustain root growth down to a mineral base; and, even then, this is a very impoverished substrate. The development of some surface heterogeneity subsequent to the spread and eventual death of sub-shrubs perhaps presents a better prospect: in the forestry enclosures which Ratcliffe (1959a) described, seedlings of Sorbus aucuparia were occasionally found among the heath. Theoretically, the kinds of forest that would be expected to grow on the better soils at present https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.040 Published online by Cambridge University PressU5 Nardus stricta-Galium saxatile grassland 361 occupied by the Nardus-Galium grassland would be the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland with, at higher altitudes, perhaps also the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland; but whether there is ever any real likelihood of a full succession to such vegetation, without some intervention such as burning off of the herbage, is unknown. The wetter and more impoverished soils are even less likely to support ready tree growth although, at lower altitudes, a bout of heavy cattle-grazing, with much trampling and manuring, might be a suitable preparation for enclosure and the development of rushy vegetation with spontaneous willow-dominated stands of Betula-Molinia woodland. Distribution "