"u6","Zonation and succession The community occurs widely with other kinds of grassland and with heaths and mires in vegetation patterns where edaphic differences and treatments are the major controlling variables. Although it is not true to say that J. squarrosus is never a constituent of climax vegetation (cf. Welch 19666), the kind of abundance that it shows here is under the strong influence of biotic factors and, in most situations, the Juncus-Festuca grassland is clearly an anthropogenic replacement for other types of vegetation. The clearest soil-related zonations involving the community are seen where the wet peaty profiles that it favours occur in sequences running from free-draining acidic mineral soils through to ombrogenous peats. Often, in such patterns, the Juncus-Festuca grassland grades, over moist peaty podzols, disposed over steeper slopes or more pervious ground, to some sort of Nardus- Galium grassland, the boundary between the vegetation types being frequently a matter of the dominance of https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.041 Published online by Cambridge University PressU6 Juncus squarrosus-Festuca ovina grassland 373 either J. squarrosus or Nardus against a background flora that can remain more or less uniform throughout. Thus, the Agrostis-Luzula and Vaccinium sub-communities of the Juncus-Festuca grassland can pass almost imperceptibly into Species-poor Nardus-Galium grassland, with a variety of fine-leaved grasses, V. myrtillus and pleurocarpous mosses frequent right through the swards. Or, on more strongly gleyed or flushed soils, or over shallow redistributed peats of varying degrees of wetness, there can be a continous zonation from the Carex-Calypogeia type of Juncus-Festuca grassland to the Agrostis-Poly trichum sub-community of the Nardus- Galium grassland, with Agrostis canina, Carex nigra, Polytrichum commune and Ptilidium ciliare common overall. Frequently, too, the Nardus-Galium grassland passes in turn to the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, typically a vegetation type of free-draining podzolic soils and base-poor brown earths, but extending in its Vaccinium-Nardus sub-community on to moister and more humic profiles. J. squarrosus does run on into such vegetation as an occasional associate and sometimes there can be a direct transition from the Juncus-Festuca community to the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland marked by a fairly sharp reduction in the abundance of the rush. In the opposite direction in this kind of zonation, the Juncus-Festuca grassland often gives way, with varying degrees of abruptness, to some type of blanket-mire vegetation developed over ombrogenous peats that thicken up with the move on to gently-sloping or flat ground. Typically, through the range of the community, this is the Calluna-Eriophorum bog or, in the southern Pennines and locally elsewhere, the very impoverished Eriophorum bog. With the gradual increase in peat depth and wetness over graded transitions to level ground, the Carex-Calypogeia and Sphagnum sub-communities can form a fairly gentle, uninterrupted zonation to such mire types, with species such as Eriophorum vaginatum, E. angustifolium, Scirpus cespitosus and the Sphagna becoming more important in the vegetation on moving towards the intact mire plane. And, in some cases, there is an intervening belt of Ericion wet heath, usually of the Scirpus-Erica type, the Vaccinium sub-community of which can make the transition between the grassland and the mire even more gradual and protracted. Complete patterns of this kind, uncomplicated by topographic variation or too many confusions deriving from treatments, are rare, but they can be seen in broad outline over many slopes and summits through the range of the community. Sometimes, the vegetation types are disposed over ground of increasing height and lessening slope so as to form a broad altitudinal zonation, a pattern clearly visible over the rounded tops of the Moorfoot and Moffat Hills (Smith 1918) in the Southern Uplands, on the terraced scenery of the Pen- nines (Adamson 1918, Eddy et al. 1969) and over some of the less calcareous mountains through the Breadal- bane range, as on Meall Ghaordie and Meall Na Samhna (Ratcliffe 1977). In more rugged scenery, like that of the Carneddau (Ratcliffe 1959a) and Cader Idris (Edgell 1969) in Wales, the patterns tend to be more complex and fragmented and, over the craggy high ground of the north-west Highlands, the community becomes distinctly infrequent, though the massively- rounded watersheds of Beann Dearg and Seana Bhraig show a characteristic zonation (Ratcliffe 1977). In this more oceanic part of the uplands, too, there is a strong tendency for suitably gentle ground, which is usually to be found over the stepped landscape at lower altitudes, to have vegetation with much Molinia over the wet peats around the fringes of blanket mire. Here, zonations with the Molinia-Potentilla mire, Afb/zma-dominated Scir pus-Erica wet heath and the Scirpus-Eriophorum mire present an oceanic equivalent to patterns with the Juncus-Festuca community from less equable parts of the north and west and, in some localities, mixed sequences with elements of both kinds of transition can be found. A variety of other complexities is often seen. For one thing, natural drying of the peats around the margins of many of our high-level blanket mires, frequently exacerbated by draining, burning and pollution, has resulted in many places in baffling patchworks of eroding and recolonising bog, wet heath, and Juncus-Festuca and Nardus-Galium grasslands over fragments of intact mire and redistributed peat washed down over the slopes below. This kind of pattern is shown to perfection on the map of Moor House produced by Eddy et al. (1969). Then, the zonations described above are frequently cut through by vegetation types which pick out seepage lines, flushes, water-tracks and streams. The Juncus- Festuca grassland can itself mark such sites within tracts of drier grasslands, occurring over irrigated ground and along the periodically-flooded terraces of streams, but often it occurs as a transitional zone around stands of soligenous mire vegetation on the more or less permanently waterlogged peats and humic gleys. The commonest pattern of this kind involves the Carex echinata- Sphagnum mire, the most widespread of our sub-montane sedge- or rush-dominated base-poor flushes and the Carex-Nardus sub-community of that vegetation can grade continuously with the Carex-Calypogeia sub community of the Juncus-Festuca grassland, such spe cies as A. canina, C. nigra, J. squarrosus, F. ovina and P. commune occurring throughout, but with a noticeable increase in poor-fen herbs and Sphagna in moving on to wetter ground. Again, this kind of zonation is well shown on the map of Moor House (Eddy et al. 1969) and on that from Cader Idris (Edgell 1969). Further complexities occur where such irrigation brings a measure of base-enrichment, something that is widely seen on the hills between Breadalbane and Clova, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.041 Published online by Cambridge University Press374 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities where there is seepage from Dalradian Limestone and calcareous metasediments, through those parts of the Pennines where Carboniferous Limestone or drift de rived from it are important elements in the landscape and, more locally, where there is seepage from limy partings among shales and sandstones or calcareous intrusions. In such situations, well-defined flushes are generally occupied by the strikingly calcicolous Pingui- culo-Caricetum or, on higher ground, by the Carici- Saxifragetum, but, where the water trickles through Juncus-Festuca vegetation, there can be a flushed zone of the Agrostis-Luzula sub-community with a moderately basiphile character. In other cases, the Carex sub community of the Nardus-Galium grassland, sometimes with locally abundant J. squarrosus, can also occur on the irrigated ground and, where there are more free- draining lime-rich soils on the slopes around, the Fes tuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland is replaced there by the Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland. The flanks of Ben Lawers have good patterns of this kind with the more calcifuge zonations to soligenous mires occurring in close proximity (Ratcliffe 1977). Then there are the effects of treatments, which interact with the edaphic influences over the full range of soils on which the Juncus-Festuca vegetation occurs. On exposed slopes at higher altitudes, the community sometimes grades, through the Vaccinium sub-community, to wind-blasted heath maintained by harsh climatic con ditions, but for the most part it is an anthropogenic vegetation type whose general abundance over wet, peaty ground through the hill pastures of the north and west is a reflection of the spread of J. squarrosus in damp swards with uncontrolled, selective grazing. Even on soils which are just moist, such treatment may still give the plant a strong competitive edge against many of the fine-leaved grasses of calcifuge swards though, being a little more palatable than Nardus, it probably loses out to this plant where both species are at home edaphically. However, where heavy grazing has been combined with burning over wet heaths and blanket mires, a commonplace through many upland areas, the Juncus-Festuca community can extend into situations which would never support vigorous Nardus-Galium grassland. By affecting balances of this kind, complex histories of land use, involving episodes of burning and local variations in grazing intensity, have undoubtedly played a large part in the development of the patchworks of vegetation seen in places like Moor House (Welch 1967, Eddy et al. 1969). Reversing the advance of J. squarrosus by manipulations of continued grazing is difficult, particularly in the severely run-down landscape of eroded bog margins. Among grasslands, Milton (1940) showed how, with a shift to the kind of heavy grazing, trampling and dunging that cattle and ponies provide, the abundance of both J. squarrosus and Nardus can be reduced in the type of vegetation included here, but achieving this over extensive tracts of hill land without damaging the betterquality swards in the mosaic is another matter. Relaxation of grazing, on the other hand, is a readier way of eliminating J. squarrosus because, unlike Nardus, its squarrose rosettes are readily overwhelmed by taller herbage and the accumulation of litter. In the enclosure experiments at Moor House, for example, the rush was all but eliminated from the Vaccinium sub-community by tussocky growth of D. flexuosa and F. ovina after just seven years of protection, while, in vegetation approximating to the Carex-Calypogeia type, Eriophorum vagi natum and D. flexuosa completely extinguished it after a decade (Welch & Rawes 1964, Rawes 1981). On peats such as those of this latter site, the Calluna-Eriophorum mire is probably the natural climax vegetation, though reversion to impoverished Eriophorum mire is perhaps more likely over drying blanket-bog fringes (Ratcliffe 1959a, Rawes 1981). Over thinner deposits and redistributed peat, the likely successor with reduction of grazing is some sort of Scirpus-Erica wet heath, perhaps the Vaccinium type with its mixtures of V. myrtillus, Erica tetralix and Calluna with J. squarrosus, Nardus and occasional small fine-leaved grasses and pleurocarps. Then, over peaty mineral soils, the Juncus-Festuca grassland may revert to Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, the Alchemilla-Carex sub-community of which comes close in its floristics to the Agrostis-Luzula and Vaccinium sub-communities here. Throughout its range, the Jun cus-Festuca vegetation is found with these different kinds of heath in mosaics which are probably controlled mainly by differences in grazing intensity and frequency of burning. Towards lower altitudes and over soils which are not too wet or impoverished, it is possible that withdrawal of grazing from such patchworks could permit succession through heath to forest, perhaps some kind of Betula-Molinia or Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland, but this is unlikely over more inhospitable ground at higher altitudes. Distribution "