"u7","Zonation and succession The Nardus-Carex grass-heath is characteristically found with sub-shrub vegetation, snow-bed communities and mires in the low-and middle-alpine zones of our higher mountains, where vegetation patterns are influenced mostly by differences in exposure and soil moisture, themselves in turn much dependent on topography. Towards higher altitudes, the community often gives way to summit moss-heath or fell-field, while below it usually passes to heaths and grasslands among which anthropogenic factors become of increasing importance. Essentially, the Nardus-Carex vegetation can be seen as an extension downwards of grass- and sedge-dominated heath into the zone of sub-shrub communities where there is locally prolonged snow-lie through the winter and spring, and it is usually associated towards its lower levels with some kind of moderately chionophilous bilberry vegetation. Most often, this is the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath which, throughout the range of the Nardus-Carex heath but especially in the Grampians, tends to replace it whenever snow melts a little earlier and the waters drain away rather more sharply (Figure 33). The zonation between the two communities is partly a broad altitudinal one, with the Vaccinium- Deschampsia heath becoming increasingly important over sheltered ground towards the transition to the sub alpine, the Nardus-Carex community petering out generally below around 600 m, the Vaccinium- Deschampsia heath often extending down to 400 m. But, within the low-alpine zone, mostly between 600 and 800 m, the vegetation types frequently occur together, dis posed over ground that is sheltered to varying degrees or where differences in slope affect the readiness with which melt-water drains away. One community can thus give way to the other with shifts in aspect, north- and east facing slopes providing sufficient shelter and shade for the Nardus-Carex grass-heath to replace the Vaccinium- Deschampsia vegetation, or with changes in slope, a pattern well seen over the treads and risers of terraced ground on the Cairngorms (Burges 1951) and, of course, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.042 Published online by Cambridge University PressU7 Nardus stricta-Carex bigelowii grass-heath 383 around distinct snow-beds, several examples of which were illustrated by McVean & Ratcliffe (1962). In the Cairngorms, which has a greater range of chionophilous vegetation than any other mountain system in Britain, a moderately late snow-bed in the low-alpine zone characteristically has a central patch of Nardus-Carex vege tation, usually of the Empetrum-Cetraria type, but with Scirpus often thickening up on the wettest ground towards the base, with an arch of Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath on the steeper back face. Essentially similar patterns occur on Monadhliath and right down through the east-central Highlands, particularly on Beinn a’Ghlo, and then more locally in the western Highlands, over the Fannich and Monar hills, on Ben Wyvis and Beinn Dearg, though from Breadalbane to Clova, and at lower altitudes to the west, the Typical sub-community increasingly replaces the Empetrum-Cetraria type. The absolute differences in length of snow-lie and soil wet ness which control the switch from the Nardus-Carex to the Vaccinium-Deschampsia vegetation are still un known but, floristically, the major change is in a move from Nardus dominance to an abundance of sub-shrubs, the low canopy of the heath being particularly rich in V. myrtillus and E. nigrum, with ssp. nigrum appearing at lower altitudes, and V. vitis-idaea also occurring fre-Figure 33. Relationships between U7 Nardus-Carex grass-heath and H18 Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath on snow-bound slopes through the montane zone, with variations at different localities. shorter snowlie & brisker drainage of melt-waterslonger snowlie & gentle drainage of melt-waters U7a Hl 8a U7b Hl 8aIn the Cairngorms with U7a Nardus-Carex grassheath, Empetrum-Cetraria sub-community and Hl8a Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, Hylocomium- Rhytidiadelphus sub community On somewhat steeper slopes and at lower altitudes through the Central & Eastern Highlands with U7b Typical Nardus-Carex grass-heath replacing the Empetrum-Cetraria sub-community On steeper slopes with some grazing around Breadalbane, with U7c Nardus-Carex grass-heath, Alchemilla-Festuca sub community and H18b Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, Alchemilla-Carex sub-communityquently. C. bigelowii becomes just occasional, R. lanuginosum is much less abundant and plants like J. squarrosus and S. cespitosus hardly ever appear in the heath but there is often strong continuity through the grasses and other cryptogams. The two vegetation types come especially close in the Empetrum-Racomitrium sub community of the heath, but the Hylocomium-Rhytidiadelphus type grades into Typical Nardus-Carex heath and the Alchemilla-Carex sub-community into the Alchemilla-Festuca sub-community here, and zonations can be found with each of these pairs. In some places, too, the patterns are complicated by the occurrence of the Vaccinium-Rubus heath, a community which seems to be about as chionophilous as the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, but where the substrate is generally sodden peat and where R. chamaemorus, Cornus suecica and Sphagna provide a diagnostic element. On moving up through the low-alpine zone, and especially towards the wetter west, on Creag Meagaidh, Bidean Nam Bian, around Glen Affric, on the Fannich Hills, Ben Hope and Ben More Assynt, the Nardus- Carex grass-heath is quite often found among mixtures of the above vegetation types and the Deschampsia- Galium grassland, this latter often also extending up to 800 m or more and marking out slopes with moderately long snow-lie and, more particularly, sustained irrigation by the trickling of melt-water and rain. Here again, there can be marked continuity among the grass and pleurocarp elements of the vegetation but the change from Nardus to D. cespitosa as the dominant is usually obvious enough. With the shift to snowier slopes at higher altitudes, locally through the western Highlands, as around Beinn Dearg, the Monar Forest and the Affric-Cannich Hills, but more widely over Monadhliath and particularly the Cairngorms, the proportion of more strikingly chionophilous vegetation increases and here the Nardus-Carex grass-heath is most commonly represented by the Empetrum-Cetraria sub-community, frequently forming a surround to various kinds of very late snow-bed vegetation. Through the central Highlands, this is often the Carex-Poly trichum sedge-heath, where plants such as C. bigelowii, Polytrichum alpinum, Cetraria islandica, Cla donia arbuscula and C. uncialis maintain a strong qualitative continuity, but where Nardus becomes very sparse and the sedge generally dominant with much Dicranum fuscescens, a moss that is only occasional and usually of low cover in the Nardus-Carex grass-heath. Quite fre quently, in the Cairngorms, there is some slight difference between the Empetrum-Cetraria vegetation above the snow-bed and that, some 100-150 m downslope, on the gentler ground below. It is in the former situation that lichens such as Cladonia bellidiflora and Cetraria delisei tend to be better represented, with Scirpus more prominent in the latter, but this variation is not so https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.042 Published online by Cambridge University Press384 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities striking as that implied by McVean & Ratcliffe ’s (1962) separation of a higher Nardetum medio-alpinum from their Nardus-Trichophorum nodum. In other places, where snow lies longest of all, it is the moss-dominated vegetation of the Polytrichum-Kiaeria or Salix-Racomitrium communities that occurs within a surrounding zone of the Nardus-Carex heath. Here, the boundaries between the less and more chionophilous vegetation are usually well marked by a reduction in the abundance of C. bigelowii, increased frequency of such plants as Salix herbacea, Saxifraga stellaris and Omalo- theca supina, and prominence of snow-tolerant bryophytes like Racomitrium heterostichum, Kiaeria starkei, Conostomum tetragonum, Polytrichum sexangulare, Oligotrichum hercynicum and Gymnomitrium concinnatum. McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) provide a sketch of a snow-bed complex from over 1200 m in the Cairngorms where lichen-rich Empetrum-Cetraria vegetation forms a fringe around a nivation hollow, with the Polytrichum- Kiaeria community marking out the patches of deepest and longest snow-lie and running along the relatively stable dry watercourses. There is also Salix-Racomi- trium vegetation on stone-striped ridges running down between the snow patches where there is intermittent irrigation and downwash. In some localities, where stabilised block scree, tumbled boulders or ledges occur in those beds where snow lies longest, the Cryptogramma-Athyrium community can be found in close juxtaposition with the Nardus-Carex grass-heath, its clumps of ferns benefiting by the protection that the snow cover provides, usually marking out the stands clearly. In the Cairngorms, and less extensively over high ground elsewhere through the east-central Highlands, the context for these late snow-beds is usually Juncus- Racomitrium fell-field which extends up, on gently- sloping and flat areas, over the summits of these mountains where exposure can be severe. The floristic differences between this and the Nardus-Carex heath are not always very marked, particularly where, in the fell-field vegetation, both C. bigelowii and R. lanuginosum are abundant with scattered grasses and a rich and extensive lichen flora. Moreover, extensive tracts of Juncus- Racomitrium vegetation are the exception, the usual picture being of a network of erosion surfaces, among which gentle hollows and shallow basins which accumulate a little snow can have patches of Nardus-Carex grass-heath, the boundaries between the communities being often complex and sometimes diffuse. But, as a general guide, Nardus is scarce in the fell-field and Juncus-trifidus is typically at least co-dominant. Even at some sites within the east-central Highlands, then down through the Grampians, on Carn Gorm, Ben More and Ben Alder, and increasingly with the shift to the more oceanic mountains of the western Highlands, flat and gently-sloping ground of this kind, with moderate exposure over summits and spurs, has some kind of Carex-Racomitrium moss-heath. This occurs through roughly the same altitudinal zone as the Nardus-Carex grass-heath, replacing it wherever a combination of lack of shelter with reasonably sharp drainage gives R. lanuginosum a strong, competitive advantage in the cool, humid climate. It can thus run up, around and beyond low-alpine snow-beds, on to higher ground, occurring very extensively over the tops of more rounded mountains of north-west Scotland such as Beinn Dearg and Ben Wyvis, or provide a general context for Nardus- Carex and Deschampsia-Galium snow-fields over slopes that are too freely draining to have blanket mire, as can be seen through the Kintail-Glen Affric district. In their floras, the Carex-Racomitrium and Nardus-Carex com munities show great continuity, with C. bigelowii, V. myrtillus, D. flexuosa, G. saxatile, R. lanuginosum, Cla donia uncialis and Cetraria islandica occurring very commonly through both, but Nardus is only very occasional in the former vegetation type, where dominance almost always lies with R. lanuginosum or mixtures of this with C. bigelowii and V. myrtillus. Nonetheless, Typical sub-communities of each come very close in their composition and the Galium type of Carex-Raco- mitrium heath can intergrade with the Alchemilla-Festuca sub-community of the Nardus-Carex vegetation. With the shift on to exposed situations over gently- sloping spurs and summits at lower altitudes, dwarfed sub-shrub heaths with abundant mosses or lichens tend to replace these communities in patterns with the Nar dus-Carex grass-heath. In the more oceanic west, R. lanuginosum and bulky pleurocarps are very prominent in such vegetation and through the low-alpine zone there, particularly where the ground becomes rough and rocky, the Vaccinium-Racomitrium heath characteristically replaces the Nardus-Carex community where the slopes are less sheltered and snow-bound. V. myrtillus and/or E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum and the mosses are usually co-dominant in the heath, but plants like C. bigelowii, D. flexuosa, G. saxatile and Nardus can all occur very commonly and, in the widespread Cetraria sub-community, a variety of lichens enhances the floristic continuity between the vegetation types. Moving down into the sub-alpine zone in the western Highlands, Calluna becomes increasingly important in such dwarfed heaths, with Arctostaphylos spp. figuring more locally, and then the Nardus-Carex grass-heath gives way over very exposed brows to some kind of Calluna- Racomitrium or Calluna-A. alpinus vegetation, sub shrubs again becoming an abundant element in the cover, though the canopy is often very stunted and patchy in the wind-blasted conditions. Through the https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.042 Published online by Cambridge University PressU7 Nardus stricta-Carex bigelowii grass-heath 385 east-central Highlands, directly comparable zonations and mosaics can be seen where moderately late snowbeds occur z among exposed spurs, although here it is lichens that have uncompromising dominance in the ground layer, the Vaccinium-Cladonia heath running up with the Nardus-Carex vegetation to the middle-alpine, the Calluna-Cladonia heath extending right down among the lower altitude snow-beds to the sub-alpine. The Racomitrium sub-community of the former and the Cladonia sub-community of the latter can be seen as floristic transitions to Nardus-Carex vegetation where slight hollows or a shift in aspect provide a modest amount of shelter. In large-scale altitudinal zonations, the low-alpine sub-shrub communities and snow-beds give way below to heaths and grasslands which are strongly modified by anthropogenic activities, being maintained essentially by grazing and burning. Among the varied patchworks of vegetation types clothing these lower slopes, the Nardus-Galium grassland makes the closest approach to the Nardus-Carex grass-heath, particularly where it runs on to sunless aspects at rather higher altitudes than is usual, where, in its Racomitrium sub-community, R. lanuginosum, and S. cespitosus become common with occasional C. bigelowii, E. nigrum, and Cetraria among the abundant Nardus surrounding the more obviously chionophilous vegetation. In other situations, patches of wetter grassland with Nardus and J. squarrosus, usually some kind of Juncus-Festuca vegetation, can occur on wetter peaty soils transitional to blanket peat mantling the shelving slopes at lower altitudes. Indeed, in the east-central Highlands, ombrogenous bog of the Calluna-Eriophorum type is quite a common context for snow-beds over gentle peat-bearing slopes at even very high altitudes and, where melt-water emerges in springs from patches of Nardus-Carex grass-heath and runs into such vegetation, a stand of the Philonoto-Saxifragetum often marks the spring and its vigorous rills. Distribution "