"u8","Zonation and succession The Carex-Polytrichum sedge-heath occurs in the low- and middle-alpine zones of the central Highlands with a variety of other chionophilous communities, fell-field vegetation and dwarfed sub-shrub heath in zonations and mosaics that depend largely on the degree of exposure over the slopes and summit plateaus. Moving further west, there is an increasing tendency for the vegetation of all but the latest snow-beds to be replaced by their more oceanic equivalents, and the Carex- Polytrichum sedge-heath persists only very locally among these sequences in the western Highlands. In shifting down into the sub-alpine zone throughout the range of the community, there are transitions to heaths and grasslands that are increasingly anthropogenic in their origin. The most complete range of chionophilous vegetation through the heartland of the Carex-Polytrichum sedgeheath in the central Highlands is to be seen over the north-facing slopes of the Cairngorms, where the community occurs among a suite of snow-field vege tation disposed according to variation in length of snow lie, ease of drainage and the amount of instability due to freeze-thaw and creep. Where the snow cover persists fairly long, the Carex-Polytrichum sedge-heath may represent the most chionophilous vegetation type of the sequence, occupying the centre of small snow-beds or filling larger concavities which accumulate drifts, or covering more extensive tracts in patchy fashion over generally sheltered gentle slopes. Around it as an enclosing zone, or forming mosaics with it on ground that has fine patchworks of less and more exposed areas, there is often to be found the Nardus-Carex grass-heath, zonations between the two vegetation types being sometimes very gradual. C. bigelowii, Poly trichum alpinum, Cetraria islandica, Cladonia arbuscula and C. uncialis give a strong measure of continuity, particularly where the Poly trichum-Ptilidium sub-community of the sedgeheath occurs with the Empetrum-Cetraria sub-community of the grass-heath, but the increasing prominence of Nardus and reduction of moss cover are usually suffi cient to define the boundary. Where the snow cover is a little less persistent or the drainage of the melt-water more free, the Dicranum-Racomitrium sub-community of the sedge-heath and the Typical or Alchemilla- Festuca forms of the grass-heath can occur together in similar patterns, with V. myrtillus as well as Nardus, and often too pleurocarpous mosses, becoming more prominent with the shift on to less snow-bound slopes. This kind of sequence frequently continues into some sort of Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, a vegetation type of moderately sheltered and often rather steeper, better- drained ground, where dominance generally lies with the sub-shrubs. Running down into the sub-alpine, this community often forms a patchy zone of fairly chionophilous vegetation below the altitudes at which the Carex-Polytrichum sedge-heath is best represented (Figure 34). Where the snow cover persists longer than is usual over the community, as in the very latest snow-beds that are such a distinctive feature on the sunless northern slopes of the Cairngorms, the Carex-Polytrichum vege tation typically gives way to a patch of either the Poly trichum-Kiaeria or, on more unstable ground, the Salix-Racomitrium community. There, C. bigelowii and Polytrichum alpinum can both remain fairly frequent, but they are rarely abundant and dominance usually lies with such snow-tolerant bryophytes as P. sexangulare, K. starkei, R. heterostichum, Conostomum tetragonum, Oligotrichum hercynicum and Gymnomitrium concinna- tum, with common records for Salix herbacea, Saxifraga stellaris and Omalotheca supina. Common variations on this basic theme can be seen where melt-waters emerge from late snow-beds in dis tinct springs where the Pohlietum glacialis, with its striking apple-green carpets of P. wahlenbergii var. glacialis, is characteristic, or, where the snow-lie is not https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.043 Published online by Cambridge University Press392 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities quite so long, the Sphagno-Anthelietum, with its swelling masses of Anthelia julacea. High-altitude stands of the Philonoto-Saxifragetum, dominated by Philonotis fon- tana, Dicranella palustris and Scapania undulata, can also be found where swift-running rills carry away melt from the Car ex-Poly trichum sedge-heath. Then, where the gentle slopes carrying the community give way to rocky or boulder-strewn ground with long-persistent Figure 34. Patterns in and around snow-beds. U7a Nardus-Carex grass-heath, Empetrum-Cetraria sub-community U7b Nardus-Carex grass-heath, Typical sub-community U8a Carex-Poly trichum sedge-heath, Polytrichum- Ptilidium sub-community U8b Carex-Poly trichum sedge-heath, Dicranum- Racomitrium sub-community U9 Juncus-Racomitrium rush-heath H18a Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, Hylocomium-Rhytidiadelphus sub-community Hl8b Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath, Alchemilla- Carex sub-community (c) Moderatesnow, it can pass abruptly to fern-dominated Cryptogramma-Athyrium vegetation. Very typically, over the high summits of the Cairngorms, the zone of low-and middle-alpine communities developed on the more snow-bound slopes gives way to Juncus-Racomitrium fell-field. This is itself a somewhat chionophilous vegetation type in many situations, extending often on to moderately sheltered ground where there can be an intermittent powdering of snow up to 50 cm or so deep throughout the winter (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962) and it can form a fringe over the convex upper margins of snow-beds, surrounding the Carex-Poly trichum sedge-heath itself, or grading to it through an intervening zone of Nardus-Carex grassheath. Frequently, though, it occurs in a network of loose erosion surfaces over more exposed plateaus, with the more chionophilous vegetation picking out distinct shallow basins. C. bigelowii, R. lanuginosum and many of the lichens continue as frequent components of the fell-field, but mosses are generally sparse, and J. trifidus, an uncommon plant in Carex-Polytrichum sedge-heath, is a constant and often abundant feature. The geographical range of the Juncus-Racomitrium heath is very strongly confined to a small part of the east central Highlands: it occurs patchily on some other summits around the Cairngorms but over the plateaus of Lochnagar and in parts of the Clova-Caenlochan area, for example, it is extensive tracts of the Carex- Polytrichum sedge-heath itself that are the most obvious feature of gentle high-altitude slopes. And, with the shift westwards to Ben Alder and on its northern outliers in the Affric-Cannich Hills and on Ben Wyvis, the Carex- Polytrichum community gives way to the more oceanic Carex-Racomitrium heath where later snow-beds occur in stretches of level or gently-sloping ground that are more exposed. J. trifidus continues as a locally prominent plant in such vegetation but the most striking feature is the great abundance of R. lanuginosum which generally serves to distinguish the community from the Carex-Polytrichum sedge-heath. However, there is much floristic continuity between the two vegetation types and the Dicranum-Racomitrium sub-community, in particular, with its frequent records for R. lanuginosum, V. myrtillus and grasses, can grade gently into the moss-heath. Increasingly over these western hills, too, the Deschampsia-Galium grassland occurs among sequences of chionophilous vegetation, forming extensive tracts over moderately snow-bound slopes and those well irrigated by melt-water. In its Rhytidiadelphus sub-community, of gentler and more snow-bound hill sides, it comes quite close to the Dicranum-Racomitrium type of Carex-Polytrichum sedge-heath, although the abundance of R. loreus and Hylocomium splendens will usually mark the boundary between the vegetation types. https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.043 Published online by Cambridge University PressU8 Carex bigelowii-Poly trichum alpinum sedge-heath 393 Distribution "