"u9","Zonation and succession The Juncus-Racomitrium heath is characteristically found at the limit of the vegetated zone, terminating an altitudinal sequence of sub-shrub and grass-dominated heaths and occurring with snow-field communities in zonations and mosaics that largely reflect the degree of exposure in shifting on to higher ground and less sheltered aspects. Where there is some relief from the incessant wind and harsh frosts characteristic of the environment of the Juncus-Racomitrium heath, the community usually gives way to the Nardus-Carex grass-heath. The two vege tation types show considerable floristic continuity through frequent records in both for C. bigelowii, V. myrtillus, D. flexuosa, R. lanuginosum, Cetraria islandica, Cladonia arbuscula and C. uncialis, but J. trifidus is very scarce in the Nardus-Carex heath and Nardus is generally very abundant, often with frequent E. nigrum ssp. hermaphroditum and V. uliginosum and plants indi cative of soil wetness induced by snow-melt. On a large scale, the Juncus-Racomitrium heath is replaced by the more chionophilous community in moving to the northern and eastern slopes of the Cairngorms, in the lee of the prevailing winds and where the ground receives much less insolation, and in shifting down into the low- alpine zone. There the Nardus-Carex heath represents a transition to sub-shrub heaths like the Vaccinium-Deschampsia vegetation which are moderately chionophilous but developed over less windy and more humid slopes than the Juncus-Racomitrium heath. More locally, however, the Nardus-Carex heath takes over from the Juncus-Racomitrium heath wherever slight shifts in topography induce a little more accumulation https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521391665.044 Published online by Cambridge University Press400 Calcifugous grasslands and montane communities and persistence of snow, as in hollows or behind spurs and bluffs. And, where there is marked snow-lie in particularly sheltered and shady spots, this may in turn give way to a late snow-bed community, producing sometimes finely-grained mosaics of less and more chio nophilous vegetation. Within patches of the Nardus- Carex heath, for example, there can be a central zone of the Carex-Polytrichum sedge-heath with its striking carpets of Polytrichum alpinum and Dicranum fuscescens, of the Polytrichum-Kiaeria moss-heath with abundant K. starkei, or of the Salix-Racomitrium community with R. heterostichum and crusts of hepatics and the dwarf willow. Or, in more sudden zonations, the Juncus- Racomitrium heath may pass directly to one or other of these kinds of vegetation. Especially distinctive are the very small-scale patterns produced by the local development of tiny patches of the Salix-Racomitrium community within the depressed centres of old rush tussocks (Ingram 1958). In other places, fields of windswept gravel contain sheltered stretches of boulders where the Cryptogramma-Athyrium community marks out late snow-lie. This particular range of vegetation types shows its full development only over the higher slopes and plateaus of the Cairngorms. Outlying stands of the Juncus-Racomitrium heath can be found in similar zonations elsewhere in the central Highlands and, in the form of the Salix sub-community, at a very few localities further west, but even around the Cairngorms there is a tendency for this kind of vegetation to be replaced in these sequences by the Carex-Racomitrium heath in situations that are a little more sheltered and, moving towards the more oceanic western Highlands, this community quickly prevails, eventually extending on to even the bleakest ablation surfaces. The change is already visible in shifting to the western spurs and ridges of the Cairngorms above Glen Feshie and, on exposed ground over the high plateaus of Lochnagar, there are extensive transitions between the Cladonia-Cetraria sub-community of the Juncus-Racomitrium heath and Typical Carex- Racomitrium heath, the switch from the one vegetation type to the other being marked by a reduction in lichen cover, an increase in the abundance of R. lanuginosum and the loss of J. trifidus. Distribution "