"w1","Zonation and succession On the margins of open waters, the Salix-Galium woodland often forms a patchy fringe behind some kind of swamp vegetation growing on the wetter mineral sub strates, e.g. the Phragmitetum australis, Typhetum latifo- liae, Sparganietum erecti, Caricetum ripariae or Carice- turn vesicariae. In more extensive transitions, there can be an intervening zone of Phragmites-Eupatorium or Phragmites-Urtica fen or complex mosaics of woodland, fen and swamp which reflect the extent and pattern of colonisation by woody vegetation: such patchworks are a common feature of silted pools, disused ponds and canals and larger loops of sluggish streams. On occasion, the community can pass, towards drier ground, to some type of Alnus-Urtica woodland but, very frequently, agricultural improvement almost to the margins of open waters means that stands of the Salix- Galium woodland give way to modified herbaceous vegetation. Such transitions may be gradual, as in ill- drained farmland around field ponds, where the community may pass to grazed Holco-Juncetum or Lolio-Cynosuretum. In other cases, sharp treatment- related boundaries terminate the sequence more abruptly and the woodland remains isolated within an intensive agricultural landscape. Some other particular contexts of the Salix-Galium woodland deserve special mention. In roadside ditches, the community can occur in linear stands which on occasion function as hedges and here it is usually fronted by some kind of mown Arrhenatheretum. In dune slacks, it can form a zone between the Salix repens-Holcus lanatus community on wetter ground and some kind of grassland or heath on the drier fixed sand around. Where the community occurs in the laggs of raised mires, it gives way towards the mire centre to herbaceous bog vegetation or, where trees have colonised the drying peat surface, to the Betula-Molinia woodland. Serai developments of the Salix-Galium woodland have not been followed but, in its usual position in topogenous wetlands with mineral soils, it would seem most likely that the community would be replaced by Alnus-Urtica woodland with increased terrestrialisation. Extension of an Alnus glutinosa or Betula pubescens canopy above the sallows and an increase in Urtica dioica, Rubusfruticosus agg. and dryopteroid ferns in the field layer would result in a composition akin to that found in the Sambucus or Betula sub-communities of that woodland type. Salix-Galium woodland as defined here is not a precursor to the richer kinds of carr on fen peats. In more exposed localities, as around the coasts of Cornwall, west Wales and western Scotland, the community may represent the end-point of colonisation by woody species on wetter mineral soils. Distribution "