"w10","Zonation and succession Zonations between different kinds of Quercus-Pteri- dium-Rubus woodland and transitions to other woodland types are primarily related to edaphic variation. https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.015 Published online by Cambridge University PressW10 Quercus robur-Pteridium aquilinum-Rubus fruticosus woodland 185 Treatment differences produce effects of their own but they can also emphasise or confuse soil-related patterns. Marginal zonations sometimes represent successional changes but very often now agricultural use of the surrounding land produces artificially abrupt transitions to herbaceous vegetation. By far the commonest kinds of edaphic zonations within stands of the community are related to differences in soil moisture, most frequently changes in the extent and frequency of surface-water gleying. Often these are related directly to variations in slope with the Typical or Acer-0xalis sub-communities picking out areas with better surface drainage, often here on ground with only a very gentle slope, and the Anemone sub community marking hollows and plateau tops. Similar patterns can be seen where ground-water gleying produces local areas of wetter soil along the sides of streams flowing through Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland (as in the transect in Pigott 1982). Quite frequently, such zonations continue into some kind of alder woodland. Around slope flushes, for example, there is often a transition to the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland. This may be quite gradual, with a progressive increase in herbs such as Deschampsia cespitosa or Juncus effusus and a slow switch to Alnus- dominance. In other cases, there is an abrupt appearance of Carex remota or C. pendula in sharply-defined patches. Both these kinds of zonation are very well seen along the base of the Lower Greensand in the Weald and on slopes cut into the Coal Measure shales of the Pennines. Where there is local peat accumulation in small river valleys, the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland may give way to small stands of the Alnus-Carex woodland, quite a common pattern in the Weald again and in some Essex woods (e.g. Rackham 1980, Wheeler 1980c). In other cases, it is the Alnus-Urtica woodland which terminates the sequence on alluvial flats, the appearance of Urtica dioica and Galium aparine marking the transition to more eutrophic soils. The other very common kind of zonation to other woodland types is related to differences in the base status of the soils. Very often, sites in which the Quercus- Pteridium-Rubus woodland is represented cover geological transitions to bedrocks or superficials which are either more or less calcareous. Where there is a switch to limestones, lime-rich shales or clays or to drift with more calcium carbonate, the community characteristically passes to the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland on more base-rich soils, usually brown earths, calcareous stagnogleys or pelosols, more rarely free-draining rendzinas. Sharp alternations of different bedrocks, especially typical here of the Cretaceous and Eocene sequences of the south-east, or abrupt differences in the nature of superficials (as at Gamlingay: Adamson 1912), can be marked by equally well defined floristic zona tions, with an abrupt switch in dominance from Pteridium or Holcus mollis to Mercurialis and its calcicolous associates. In the south-east, such transitions generally involve a move from the Typical, Anemone or Hedera sub-community of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland to the Primula-Glechoma, Anemone or Hedera sub community of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland respectively. To the north-west, the zonation is typically from the Acer-0xalis sub-community of the former woodland to the Geranium sub-community of the latter. It should be remembered, though, that a number of important species occur in both these kinds of woodland and, where there is a continuation of a Hyacinthoides carpet, say, under a canopy of Q. robur, Tilia, Carpinus and Corylus, the boundary between the communities may be blurred. Such gradual transitions are especially characteristic of heavy superficial deposits in the southeast, where there may be diffuse variations in the calcium carbonate content of the parent material and a complex mosaic of brown earths or stagnogleys with small but critical differences in base-status. Where the characteristic soils of the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland give way to strongly-leached brown earths, brown podzolic soils or podzols, the community is replaced by the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland. Typically, here, this kind of transition is related to a geological switch from shales or clays to some kind of arenaceous bedrock or sandy superficial deposit. Such patterns can be seen in the south-east in the Cretaceous sequences of the Weald and they are very common to the north and west where, in Carboniferous deposits, alternations of shales and grits form the basis of much of the scenery along the fringes of the Pennine uplands in Derbyshire, South and West Yorkshire and Durham. Here, the Acer-Oxalis sub-community characteristically occupies the much-weathered dips of cuestas and the lower slopes of the valley sides, with the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland clothing the more resistant grit scarps. Sharp transitions between these kinds of woodland are quite common and, though Pteridium continues through both with Q. petraea and B. pendula figuring in the canopy of each, the springtime boundary of Hyacinthoides and the restriction of Fraxinus, A. pseudoplatanus and Corylus to the Quercus- Pteridium-Rubus woodland generally serve to delimit the communities. In some situations, though, the zonation is not so clear. On steeper slopes, slipping is quite common, with grit blocks tumbling down over the incompetent shales and then there can be a patchy inter-digitation of the two kinds of woodland along the slope foot. Even on more stable slopes, terracing is frequent and then every tread may be clothed with vegetation resembling the Quercus- Pteridium-Rubus field layer, every riser with Quercus- Betula-Deschampsia herbs (e.g. Woodhead 1906, Scur- https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press186 Woodlands and scrub field 1953). When Hyacinthoides has faded from the patches of the former, such mosaics are typically marked by a patterning of Holcus mollis and Deschampsia flexuosa (Jowett & Scurfield 1949, 1952). Holcus seems to hold its own on the less sharply draining areas and also tends to hold the litter, the decay of which helps maintain the more mull-like qualities of the soils. Indeed, there is evidence that Holcus can invade the Deschampsia patches in these kinds of mosaic (Ovington 1953). Particularly in the south-east, where the effects of traditional sylviculture have persisted more extensively, coppicing treatments can confuse these soil-related tran sitions. Most obviously, where a uniform treatment has been applied across edaphic zonations, identical covers of underwood can continue over what are really the field layers of different communities. This is very common here across junctions between the Quer eus-P ter idium- Rubus woodland and the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland, both of which have been widely cropped for hazel, lime and hornbeam. Under dense underwood, especially of the heavily-shading Tilia, herbs become very sparse so there may be only the very slightest indication of where one community ends and the other begins. Even within sites made up wholly of Quer eus-P ter i- dium-Rubus woodland, coppicing produces its own pat terns of variation which are superimposed, often quite independently, over floristic differences related to, say, soil moisture. In actively-coppiced woodland, compartments marked out by varied and striking post-coppice herbaceous vegetation at different stages of development can thus provide an interruption to zonations between the Typical and Anemone sub-communities, or a cyclically changing patchwork of parcels within tracts of each. Treating a whole woodland in this way results in great spatial variation at any one time, though in any one section of a stand, the differences are essentially a temporal perturbation of an underlying floristic pattern related to natural variation in the soils. With neglect of coppicing, such edaphic transitions can become more obvious again, though after several decades of uninterrupted underwood growth the shape of old compartments can become marked on the ground once more by abrupt transitions to the Hedera sub-community with a dense woody cover. And many woodlands Subject to intensive use in the past still preserve complex patterns of zonations between the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland and other vegetation types which reflect the structural organisation of the site. Commonest among these are the transitions in larger rides and glades which are here often picked out by stands of Pteridium or Rubus-Holcus underscrub, frequently now invaded by birch, Crataegus monogyna and Prunus spinosa. External boundaries to stands of the community can show similar zonations, though where the woodlands survive within intensive agricultural landscapes, there is generally only a very compressed fringe of Crataegus or Prunus scrub with Rubus-Holcus underscrub or, on more free-draining soils, a narrow strip of Betula and Pteridium, with an abrupt transition to pasture or arable. In other situations, more extensive marginal transitions to herbaceous vegetation can be seen and these, together with young stands developing anew on railway verges (e.g. Sargent 1984) and on commons where grazing rights have fallen into disuse, can give some clues as to the serai development of the community. However, systematic studies of successions to the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland are very few (Salisbury 191 Sb, Adamson 1921, Tansley 1939), usually con cerned with stands developing on abandoned arable land and set within a very broad understanding of what ‘oak woodland ’ is or ought to be. The following observations are therefore very brief and generalised. Within the lowlands, the natural limits to the development of the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland are set, for the most part, by the character of the soils such that the community is excluded from situations where the substrate is markedly base-rich, base-poor or very wet. Within this fairly broad compass, it probably approximates to the climax forest type, except within the natural range of Fagus which competes successfully with Q. robur for dominance over similar field layers to those characteristic here on all but the moister brown soils on which the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland can occur (e.g. Watt 1923, 1924, 1925, 1934a, b). The natural herbaceous precursors to the community are probably very varied. Over the central type of brown earth, with free but not excessive drainage, less calcicolous types of the Arrhenatheretum axs likely to figure prominently with, on more waterlogged mesotrophic soils, communities like the Holco-Juncetum and the Holcus-Deschampsia grassland. Towards the extreme of more strongly leached soils, this kind of woodland can probably supersede the less calcifuge types of Festuca- Agrostis grassland, though it is not usually a natural successor to ericaceous heath. Where these types of vegetation are not regularly grazed, mown or burned, invasion by some of the characteristic shrubs and trees of the community can be very rapid. On moister soils, Crataegus monogyna and Prunus spinosa, Rubus fruticosus and Rosa spp. are frequent early colonisers, quickly thickening up to form a patchwork of scrub. In drier situations, Betula pendula becomes increasingly prominent in the early stages and it too may form dense thickets. In certain cases, this kind of young woodland can persist for some time: birch- dominated stands in particular seem to be more resistant https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.015 Published online by Cambridge University PressW10 Quercus robur-Pteridium aquilinum-Rubus fruticosus woodland 187 to further development than might be expected from the relatively short life of the individual trees (e.g. Rackham 1980). But it is a very common feature of this type of succession that oak, especially Q. robur, invades very early. The present poor regeneration of this tree within closed woodlands is well known (e.g. Watt 1919, Jones 1959, Rackham 1980) and probably a fairly natural consequence of a number of factors, chiefly the neglect of coppicing which created a regular sequence of large well-lit gaps, and loss of seedlings to moth caterpillars and oak mildew (e.g. Jones 1959, Shaw 1974, Rackham 1980). In the open, however, young oaks can appear quickly and in profusion. Acorns are distributed much further from the parent tree than, for example, beech mast, being carried hundreds of metres by pigeons, corvids and squirrels (Jones 1959, Mellanby 1968) and they are readily able to germinate in closed swards, even if the shade cast by tall grasses, open bracken or nearby young shrubs is moderately dense (Jones 1959). Early growth may be slow but young oaks are very resilient and there seems little doubt that in many younger stands, Q. robur has played an important role from the outset. We do not know how long it takes for Quer eus - Pteridium-Rubus woodlands to acquire the richer field layers typical of the community. Young dense stands are often of the Hedera type, ivy carpets spreading even when the vegetation is in the scrub stage. And older stands derived from invasion may perhaps develop the character of the Holcus sub-community as the canopy opens and the woodland becomes more accessible to disturbance. But complete invasion by the more slow- spreading herbs probably takes centuries and, though Carpinus and Castanea may find a place in the developing woody cover in the south-east, the more diverse and complex mixtures of trees and shrubs characteristic of ancient stands are not found. Distribution "