"w11","Zonation and succession Zonations within stands of the community and between the Quer eus-Betula-Oxalis woodland and other vege tation types are most frequently related to edaphic differences and variation in grazing intensity. Often, the effects of these factors can be seen in isolation but, since lighter grazing and a tendency towards mull development can produce similar results in the field layer, it is sometimes difficult to disentangle their influence. Transitions from the Blechnum to the Dryopteris sub community, for example, may result from either of these causes; and, in some cases, they may be operating together (e.g. Tittensor & Steele 1971). Soil-related zonations here directly parallel the pat terns found among analogous woodlands in the lowland south, with transitions to more calcicolous, more calcifugous and wetter woodlands occurring commonly. On more base-rich soils, the Quer eus-Betula-Oxalis woodland typically gives way to the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland, provided the soils do not, at the same time, become very wet. Such zonations are frequent but local in the west and they often reflect a change in the https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressWil Quercuspetraea-Betula pubescens-0xalis acetosella woodland 207 character of the underlying rock, as where limy partings occur interbedded with shales in Silurian deposits in Wales, the Lake District and southern Scotland or in Carboniferous sequences in the Pennines, where andesite occurs within the Borrowdale Volcanics of the Lake District (Pearsall 1968, Pearsall & Pennington 1973), where Carboniferous Limestone replaces the intruded dolerite in Teesdale (Pigott 1956a, Graham 1971) and where Durness Limestone and Torridonian deposits are juxtaposed on Skye (Birks 1973). In such situations, there may be a fairly sharp switch from the Blechnum sub-community here to the Typical sub-community of the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland or, on less sharply contrasted soils and where grazing is less intense, from the Dryopteris sub-community to the Crépis sub-community of the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland. Quite often, however, changes in soil conditions are much more gradual or uneven than this, being related to quite slight differences in the calcareous character of a drift cover or bedrock or to diffuse flushing by base-rich waters. Then, particularly if the woodlands are grazed, the characteristic grasses of the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland may continue some way into the Fraxinus- Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland and more calcicolous herbs like Mercurialis perennis, Geum urbanum and Circaea lutetiana make but a sporadic appearance at first. Over more complex topographies, as in ravines, there may be a very disorderly inter-digitation of the two communities over the surface of tumbled boulders, slumped masses of soil, rock faces and fragmentary patches of alluvium along the stream-side. Changes in the canopy, too, can be slight, especially in the far northwest, where Q. petraea and Fraxinus are scarce and where both these communities have a scrubby cover in which B. pubescens and Sorbus figure prominently. In such situations, a rise in the prominence of Corylus may mark the transition but, further south, it is Fraxinus, less commonly Ulmus glabra and Acer pseudoplatanus, that increase. Where the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland gives way to the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis type along streams, these can often be picked out from afar as very distinct streaks of brighter green, a feature well caught in Pearsall (1968). In the Lake District, where such situations are quite frequent, relic stools of Tilia cordata, sometimes of immense size, can be found growing on the ravine edge which marks the boundary between the two communities (Pigott & Huntley 1978). Here, too, treatment has sometimes sharpened up the distinction between the communities, the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland of the interfluves having been used as oak coppice, the transitional zone and Fraxinus-Sorbus- Mercurialis woodland proper of the ravine slopes hav ing been inaccessible (Pigott & Huntley 1978). The fact that flushing is often the factor responsible for base-enrichment within sites where the Quercus- Betula-Oxalis woodland is represented, means that tran sitions of this kind often involve elements of the Alnus- Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland disposed over the very wettest ground with local patches of plants such as Lysimachia nemorum, Deschampsia cespitosa, Chrysosplenium oppositifolium and large sedges such as Carex remota, C. pendula or C. laevigata. On gentler slopes, this community may form fairly well defined flushes within the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland: these are very characteristic of Carboniferous and Silurian sequences where ground water emerges when it hits impervious shales. In analagous situations where less base-rich ground water emerges, the Alnus-Fraxinus- Lysimachia woodland is replaced by soligenous Betula- Molinia woodland. Zonations to woodland of freely-drained, acidic soils with pronounced mor accumulation and/or podzolisation typically involve replacement by the Quercus- Betula-Dicranum woodland and they can be seen throughout the range of the community wherever the influence of pervious and acidic parent materials increases and leaching can have its full effect. Sometimes, this involves a switch in the nature of the bedrock, as in moving on to Torridonian sandstones or Lewisian gneiss in north-west Scotland (e.g. Birks 1973, Ratcliffe 1977), or to more acidic strata in the Devonian Old Red Sandstone in eastern Scotland and in Silurian sequences in the Lake District, southern Scotland and Wales, to sandstones and grits in the Pennine Carboniferous or to acidic igneous rocks in the Lake District. In other cases, it is related to the thinning of a cover of colluvium or drift over such deposits or to the lessening of a flushing effect. The floristic transitions involved here can already be seen to some extent within the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland itself in the way in which the more strictly calcifugous element in the Blechnum sub-community rises to prominence as the soil cover thins to a humic cap over acidic boulders. But often the zonation continues over rankers and podzols to the Isothecium-Diplophyl- lum or Typical sub-communities of the Quer eus-Betula- Dicranum woodland in the west (Figure 21). In eastern Scotland, there are analagous transitions from the Ane mone and Stellaria-Hypericum sub-communities to the Rhytidiadelphus sub-community of the Quercus-Betula- Dicranum woodland. Locally, in this region, more calcifugous kinds of Juniperus-0xalis woodland can replace the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland in zonations of this kind and, in both east and west Scotland, the Pinus- Hylocomium woodland is locally associated with the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland on more podzolised soils. As noted earlier, the effect of grazing on the ericoid sub-shrubs which help distinguish the field layers of https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press208 Woodlands and scrub these communities, can blur the boundaries. But grazing also mediates zonations of its own, most notably to different kinds of the Festuca-Agrostis-Gcilium grassland, which is composed of virtually the same species as the field-layer constants of the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland and which, in wetter regions, can have a number of its characteristic bryophytes. Very often, on the lower slopes of the uplands, the Festuca-Agrostis grassland runs straight into unenclosed Quercus-Betula- Oxalis woodland, the only changes across the junction being the appearance of trees, an increase in the cover and variety of bryophytes with the greater shelter and a patchy dominance of Hyacinthoides or Anemone in the spring. In more inaccessible spots within such woodlands, there may be some patchy regeneration of the canopy but there is no doubt that such zonations often represent the near-final stages in the conversion of the woodland to the grassland and that the completion of the process is then attendant only on the final destruction of the trees, an event which has been only too frequent in the long history of upland grazing. Continued grazing maintains the Festuca-Agrostis- Galium grassland as a plagioclimax and recolonisation is rarely seen but it can be observed in some extensive fenced reserves or where tracts of upland have been enclosed for commercial forestry or around lake and reservoir catchments. Around Thirlmere, in the Lake District, for example, recolonisation of open grassland has been speedy: B. pubescens, Sorbus and Corylus have established themselves in local profusion and young Q. petraea can be found growing up through the thickets (Pearsall & Pennington 1973). Such enclosures could also provide opportunities for studying uninterrupted primary invasion of bare talus, free of the disturbance which the roaming of sheep and walkers bring. We do not know what the natural precursors of the Quercus- Betula-Oxalis woodland in such situations might be. The most likely candidates would seem to be open communities of bryophytes and ferns such as Thelypte- ris limbosperma and Blechnum spicant and, where there is a more extensive soil cover, vegetation like that of the Luzula sylvatica-Vaccinium myrtillus community. Fragments of such vegetation can often be found in more rocky situations close to the Quer eus-Betula-Oxalis woodland; and, on inaccessible ledges with seepage of fairly base-poor waters within tracts of Festuca-Agros- tis-Galium grassland, they can reproduce fairly faithfully the field layer of ungrazed Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland without a cover of trees. They also extend the distribution of this kind of herbaceous vegetation above the present tree-line in the Scottish Highlands and were considered by McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) as a tree-less facies of the community. Some of the characteristic herbs of the Quercus- Betula-Oxalis woodland can also be found under a cover of bracken in the Pteridium aquilinum-Galium saxatile Oxalis woodland (b). With grazing, there is often a gradual transition between these two, W17c Anthoxanthum-Agrostis sub-community of the former passing imperceptibly to W11 b Blechnum sub-community of the latter (c).Figure 21. Patterns among oak-birch woodlands in relation to soils and treatment. At a grit-shale junction (a), a common pattern on ungrazed slopes is for W17b Typical Quercus-Betula- Dicranum woodland to give way below to W1 la Dryopteris sub-community of Quercus-Betula-https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.016 Published online by Cambridge University PressWil Quercuspetraea-Betula pubescens-0xalis acetosella woodland 209 community and stands of this vegetation type are com monly seen in close association with the woodland and Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland. A characteristic pattern is for Pteridium to be very dense and vigorous over the colluvium on the lower slopes adjacent to the wood, thinning out to a sparse cover in the grassland above. This is just the kind of distribution that bracken shows within stands of the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland but there is no doubt that, with the destruction of the woodland cover and freedom from shade, it can increase greatly in abundance. Stands of the Pteri- dium-Galium community sometimes preserve elements of the richness of the woodland flora, with a vernal carpet of Hyacinthoides or Anemone, but very often they are poor in associates and the great extension of bracken over the deeper soils of the uplands is an unfortunate side effect of the widespread destruction of the community, and a change that is difficult and costly to reverse. There have been other permanent losses to coniferous forestry. The Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland will stand canopy replacement by Fagus (e.g. Watt 1931) and a moderate amount of coniferisation, but extensive planting of softwoods (except perhaps Larix spp.) greatly increases shade and speeds mor accumulation, thus accentuating the tendency to podzolisation in the wet climate, a process which is ameliorated by the natural cover of oak and birch. Although the history of the loss of the Quercus- Betula-Oxalis woodland by these treatments has been long and complex, with local or temporary halts and reversals related to shifts in the balance of the upland economy, its decline has been progressive and very widespread. It seems to represent the climax type of oak birch forest on less markedly leached soils in the northwest but now survives as fragments within its potential range, usually much affected by grazing and in land scapes devoted primarily to pastoral agriculture and commercial forestry. In one area, however, it is proportionately more prominent than might be expected and that is in east-central Scotland. Here, McVean & Rat cliffe (1962) proposed that pine-dominance was the more natural development in post-Glacial forests, a suggestion largely borne out by subsequent palynological studies (e.g. Birks 1970, Gunson 1975, O’Sullivan 1977). In fact, the tree cover of the original pine forest in this region seems to have been more diverse and intimately mixed than in surviving stands of the Pinus-Hyloco- mium woodland, such that both pine and birch probably occurred together over more acidic soils. With clearance, burning and grazing, birch has increased its rela tive prominence in this region, now holding sway in both the Quer eus-Betula-Dicranum woodland on podzols and in the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland on less strongly leached profiles in sites where Pinus sylvestris was once much better represented.Distribution "