"w12","Zonation and succession Zonation within individual stands of Fagus-Mercurialis woodland are generally related to edaphic differences, upon which are superimposed variations related to canopy shade, regeneration and treatment, a pattern very well illustrated in the Cotswold woodlands studied by Barkham & Norris (1967, 1970). In fact, though the sub-communities can be clearly defined in relation to soil differences, transitional stands are very common because of the fairly gentle character of many slopes over the southern limestones and the frequently con torted fronts of their scarps. Generally speaking, how ever, within individual woodlands which cover a fair range of topographic variation, the trend is for the Mercurialis sub-community to give way to the Sanicula sub-community over steeper, more exposed slopes with shallower, drier soils, with the Taxus sub-community making a more local appearance over the steepest, rockiest ground with high exposure to wind and sun. Very locally, as on Box Hill, in Surrey, the transition continues into Taxus woodland proper with a thick undercanopy of Buxus. Many stands of the community now remain as rem nant strips of woodland isolated on the more intractable ground of scarps by the conversion of the dip slope above and the vale beneath to intensive agriculture. But in some places, the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland may run on some way over the dip slope as the Mercurialis sub-community on brown rendzinas or brown calcarhttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press228 Woodlands and scrub eous earths derived from but thin covers of superficials: this pattern seems most characteristic of the South Downs where fairly base-rich soils are quite extensive on the dip. Often, though, where there is continuity of woodland cover, there is an edaphically-related transition to the Fagus-Rubus woodland on deeper, more base-poor and patchily-gleyed brown earths formed from substantial thicknesses of superficials like Clay- with-Flints. Such zonations can be gradual but, where they are sharp, they can be very striking, with an abrupt termination of Mercwràz/zs-dominance and a switch to thick tangles of Rubus, and a replacement of the poor Fagus of the scarp by magnificent trees on the dip. Intensive farming and forestry of limestone slopes in the south-east, with conversion of the vegetation to improved pasture, arable or plantations, has severely restricted gradual transitions from the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland to more natural kinds of herbaceous communities, so that stands are now abruptly defined by artificial boundaries or have, at most, a very narrow fringe of marginal scrub and rank grassland. But, in larger gaps within existing woodlands, and where there is more long-lasting neglect of the surrounding land, fragmentary zonations can be seen which give some clue as to the serai development of this kind of woodland: these were the sorts of situations from which Watt (1924, 1934a) accumulated the data for his hypothesis on succession to beech-domination over more base-rich soils. Although Watt ’s proposals were based on observation of spatial patterns rather than monitoring through time and undertaken when a combination of severe agricultural depression and good masting in Fagus (in 1922) tended to maximise colonisation, his theory still provides a convincing account of how the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland can develop and how the major floristic differences within it are prefigured in the scrub, and perhaps also in the grassland, that precede it. Although Watt recognised a continuous range of variation between both the two major types of mature Fagus-Mercurialis woodland, the Sanicula and Mercurialis sub-communities, and their serai precursors, he defined two extreme lines of succession, the ‘Juniper sere ’ and the ‘Hawthorn sere ’ (termed the ‘Juniper- Sanicle sere ’ and the ‘Hawthorn-Mercury sere ’ by Tansley 1939). In both, a calcicolous scrub was the first major development in pasture where grazing was neglected. Qualitatively, little difference was to be perceived within this vegetation but there was some quantitative polarisation in the frequency and abundance of certain shrubs and trees according to soil conditions. On the more drought-prone, shallower soils developed on steeper slopes in exposed situations, Juniperus communis was especially frequent, often abundant and quite vigorous, with a slightly better representation, too, of Taxus, Ilex and lianes. On deeper, moister soils over gentler slopes with some measure of shelter, Crataegus was usually the dominant and, provided rabbit-grazing did not give it an advantage over Crataegus, Juniperus was not so prominent, being susceptible to shading. There was thus, early on in the succession, the same exclusion, in the one direction, by edaphic limitation and, in the other, by competition, as could be seen in the mature woodlands in the relationship between Mercurialis and Sanicula. Fagus was found to invade both types of scrub though, even with abundant mast, colonisation was slow because of the frequent remoteness of seed-parents along the upper scarp slopes and the relative scarcity of denser patches of scrub to afford protection against rabbit-grazing. However, although the greater resis tance of Juniperus to rabbit attack might have been expected to allow Fagus to thrive better there, it in fact colonised more extensively on the moister soils favoured by Crataegus: among the Juniperus scrub, there was a characteristically local pattern of dense young Fagus clumps; among the Crataegus, a more diffuse invasion over more extended areas of ground. More importantly in the short term, the moister soils also favoured a prominence of Fraxinus which, though eventually outgrown by the Fagus, could come to dominate in a temporary ‘ash consocies ’ interposed between scrub and the mature ‘beech consociation ’, and survive more frequently in the woodland derived from the ‘Hawthorn sere ’ than from the ‘Juniper sere’. In the end, however, both lines of succession terminated with the inexorable dominance of Fagus, though the different kinds of ‘mercury ’ and ‘sanicle ’ field layer preserved the important edaphic contrast that had been of major importance throughout. In fact, in the relatively dry climate of the Chilterns, Watt ’s (1934a) ‘ash consocies ’ was relatively rare but, on the moister South Downs, his earlier work (Watt 1924) and the initial survey by Adamson (1921) showed that woodlands dominated by Fraxinus or mixtures of Fraxinus and Quercus robur (termed ‘ash-oak associes ’), were of extensive and perhaps quite long-lasting occurrence, on ground which they presumed would eventually carry Fagus-Mercurialis woodland (Watt 1934Z>). As des cribed earlier, large gaps or clear-felled areas within stands of the community can also carry this kind of vegetation, classified in this scheme as Fraxinus-Acer- Mercurialis woodland, for long periods before Fagus is able to reassert its dominance. Watt (1924) did demonstrate that Fagus was able to invade mature stands of this community (an interesting observation in the light of the supposed confinement of the tree in prehistoric forests) but this may be a very haphazard process. There may be some quite subtle edaphic limitations to its expansion, especially on transitional soils which tend to favour either Fraxinus or Q. robur (e.g. Watt 19346) and some general climatic restrictions on its spread but, as https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.017 Published online by Cambridge University PressW12 Fagus sylvatica-Mercurialis perennis woodland 229 Rackham (1980) succinctly puts it, Fagus is much more sensitive to weather than to climate and we may have to concede that its local, as well as its regional, prominence and thus the balance between Fagus-Mercurialis and Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodlands in any particular area, are partly the result of coincidences of good fruiting and human disturbance, the details of which are frequently irrecoverable. On the most extreme kinds of rendzina, where Fraxinus is very unlikely to gain any prominence in the developing woodland, it seems as if the main rival to Fagus is Taxus. No evidence is available to reveal the successional origin of the Taxus sub-community here but, edaphically, it can be seen as an extreme form of the Sanicula sub-community and, in the light of Watt ’s (1926) study of Taxus woodlands proper, it seems possible that it develops where Taxus gains early prominence in Juniper «^-dominated scrub and where invasion by Fagus is not entirely excluded but where its growth is locally very restricted on extremely shallow and impoverished soils on steep, sun-baked slopes. Distribution "