"w13","Zonation and succession Typically, the Taxus woodland is found in close association with grasslands and scrub which reflect grazingrelaxation over the south-eastern Chalk. Thus, stands can be found in mosaics and zonations with a complete sequence of vegetation types from close-cropped turf of the Festuca-Avenula grassland, rank swards dominated to varying degrees by coarse grasses such as Bromus erectus, Brachypodium pinnatum, Avenula pubescens, Festuca rubra and Arrhenatherum elatius, and various kinds of Crataegus-Hedera scrub. Where rabbit-infestation has become important again, patches of Festuca- Hieracium-Thymus grassland or stands of Urtica dioica may also occur. The exact disposition of these communities, their proportions and the age structure of the Taxus woodland can reflect long and complex histories of grazing by stock and wild herbivores. Much of this information is now irrecoverable though, as Williamson (1978) has shown at Kingley Vale, the effects of recent particular events can often be revealed by careful observation. It was from a consideration of spatial patterns in a number of sites in the South Downs that Watt (1926) proposed his scheme for the general serai development of the Taxus woodland. From the varied examples of Taxus invasion, Watt characterised two main trends in succession associated with the proportional importance in the protective scrub of Juniperus and Crataegus. Where the former predominated, as on shallower soils in more exposed sites, its greater resistance to browsing allowed Taxus to gain a more extensive and rapid hold; among Crataegus, invasion was slower and more dif fuse. On the deeper and somewhat moister soils typical of Crataegus scrub, Fraxinus also became increasingly important so that, in the more gradual progress to a closed Taxus const , an intermediate stage of ‘yew-ash wood ’ supervened. Eventually, however, Taxus exerted its overwhelming dominance throughout, often leaving just either dead juniper nurses beneath or occasional emergent ash to give any clue as to the particular origin of a stand. As Watt went on to demonstrate (Watt 1934a, b), exactly the same kinds of serai development are characteristic of succession to the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland, though in that community the generally richer survival of different field layers in mature stands provides a lasting indication of the scrubby precursors and the edaphic conditions which they favour. But the great similarity of the successions does raise the question of why Fagus should invade and triumph in some situations and Taxus in others. The answer probably lies in the greater tolerance of Taxus of drier, more exposed conditions but, in many marginal cases, the success of the latter may be due to its more reliable fruiting and better seed-dispersal. Even so, Tax ws-dominance of the kind seen here is a very local phenomenon. Like Fagus, it seems to have shown a late post-Glacial spread in Britain (Firbas 1949, Godwin 1975) but it has been nowhere near as successful in establishing itself as a widespread canopy component. Once developed, however, the Taxus woodland is a climax community which cannot naturally be replaced by Fagus, or any other canopy dominant tolerant of base-rich soils, without death of the yews or felling. Some existing stands contain very old trees, though probably not as old as Watt (1962) thought: 500 years, rather than 1000, seems to be a more accurate estimate for the most ancient individuals at Kingley Vale (New- bould 1960, Williamson 1978). Stands of the community may, of course, have been in occupation in such sites for much longer, though, as Watt (1926) showed, the Taxus woodland tends to show small-scale migrations around Chalk coombes, colonising first in the head, then along the flanks and eventually, after many generations, dying from behind and invading again. In many sites, afforestation of surrounding plateau and slopes with mixtures of Fagus and conifers has isolated stands of the community, reduced their room for manoeuvre and destroyed their grand landscape context. Distribution "