"w14","Zonation and succession Zonations from the Fagus-Rubus woodland to other vegetation types most commonly reflect edaphic differences or represent stages in serai successions, though both of these kinds of transition are much affected by sylvicultural treatments and grazing or by the isolation of stands within predominantly agricultural landscapes. Some of the most intact edaphic zonations are to be seen on the Chilterns. Here, though the stands of beech are of diverse origin and have canopy structures derived by manipulations pursued, in large measure, independently of soil variation, the Fagus-Rubus woodland can still be seen in direct continuity with Fagus-Mercurialis woodland on the one hand and Fagus-Deschampsia woodland on the other, disposed in the soil-related sequence given classic expression by Watt (19346: see also Brown 1953 and Avery 1958). Incomplete sequences, lacking the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland, occur on the South Downs (e.g. Adamson 1921, Watt 1924), and the more calcifuge end of the series can be seen in the Weald and the New Forest. The sharpness of the transitions between the different kinds of beech-dominated woodlands is very variable. Zonations from the Fagus-Rubus woodland to the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland can be very striking, with an abrupt switch from a vigorous bramble underscrub on the plateau brown earth to a luxuriant carpet of Mercurialis on the scarp rendzina. But, where there is some downwash of Clay-with-Flints over the scarp brow or deposition of decalcified head in shallow valleys, the junction between the communities may be ill defined and not so clearly coincident with topography. And plateau superficials may themselves be more calcareous so that the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland extends some way on to the typical Fagus-Rubus site-type, a feature especially widespread on the South Downs. Transitions from the Fagus-Rubus to the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland are often less sharp, partly because the plateau superficials from which their soils are often derived are very variable in composition. In some localities on the Chilterns (e.g. Watt 19346), the zonation relates clearly to increasing depth of superficials with increasing distance from the scarp edge, Rubus underscrub and the more mesophytic grasses passing in well- ordered fashion to Deschampsia flexuosa, Calluna and calcifuge bryophytes. But local sandy patches and exposed brows swept clear of loose litter by wind (e.g. Avery 1958) may show unexpected transitions to the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland and there may be local development of mor beneath dense plateau beech so that mosaics of the two communities develop. Throughout these zonations, long and intensive exploitation for beech often makes canopy distinctions between the different communities very much less obvious than those of the field layer. Even in more natural circumstances, of course, Fagus is an over whelming dominant in each but changes in woody associates can sometimes also be seen. In mature stands, Fraxinus, Acerpseudoplatanus and Sorbus aria appear in the canopy more frequently with the move to the Fagus- Mercurialis woodland and Ilex is often replaced by Corylus as the leading smaller companion. In the Fagus- Deschampsia woodland, the differences are much less: both Q. robur and Ilex remain common but there is sometimes more Betula pendula and, less often, a little Q. petraea. More recently, treatments have fragmented larger stretches of these beech-dominated sequences, interposing stands with some pine and larch or plantations composed entirely of conifers. The more recent kinds of landscape with beech are well illustrated for the Chilterns by Figure 68 in Tansley (1939) and for the New Forest by the map in Tubbs (1968). The other common kind of woodland zonation involving the community, that to the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, is more complex. Sometimes this, too, is related to soil differences: there seems little doubt that, within the natural range of beech, that kind of woodland is an edaphic replacement for Fagus-Rubus woodland on strongly-gleyed soils (e.g. Watt 19346, Noirfalise 1968), and such transitions form part of the variation in the proportions of Fagus and Q. robur in the Weald, on the Chiltern plateau and in the New Forest. But complex mosaics are frequent because of fine differences in drainage impedence on gently-undulating sur faces (especially where the soils derive from superficials), and the situation is complicated by the fact that the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland seems to be a serai precursor to the Fagus-Rubus woodland. Thus, where neglected farmland or heathland on moderately base-poor soils is being colonised, or where Fagus- Rubus woodland has been felled and the site abandoned, or where large gaps develop within it, there is an initial, sometimes lengthy, period of oak-dominance before beech wins through (Watt 1924, 19346, Tansley 1939, Peterken & Tubbs 1965). Similarly, where Fagus-Rubus woodlands have been coppiced, they may have an underwood and sapling population more like that of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland (Adamson 1921). That Fagus can effect the conversion seems undeniable from the careful studies of Watt (1924,19346); that it is a precarious and sometimes very protracted process is also clear (e.g. Watt 1923, 1925, 19346, Peterken & Tubbs 1965, Rackham 1980). The ultimate precursors to the eventual development of the Fagus-Rubus woodland are probably the less https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press248 Woodlands and scrub calcicolous kinds of mesotrophic sward (various sub communities of the Arrhenatheretum and neglected meadows and pastures of the Centaureo-Cynosuretum and the Lolio-Cynosuretum) and the less extreme kinds of calcifuge sward in the Festuca-Agrostis grasslands and perhaps also, around the New Forest, the grassier types of Ulex minor-Agrostis curtisii heath. More open stands of Pteridium may also be colonised. Spinose shrubs are important invaders of all these communities, typically forming patchy Crataegus-Hedera scrub with a marginal tangle of Rubus-Holcus underscrub (e.g. Tansley 1922, Tansley & Adamson 1925, Watt 1924,19346). On more free-draining soils, Ulex europaeus may figure prominently in these early stages. Quite commonly, however, Q. robur and Ilex invade early and, if there is a seed source close by, Fagus itself. How long it takes for open herbaceous vegetation to progress fully to Fagus- Rubus woodland is unknown, but beech high forest of this type has clearly grown up in the New Forest within the last 300 years or so (Peterken & Tubbs 1965) and on the Chilterns in perhaps 200 years (Watt 19346). Active development is now rare: stands are often embedded within commercial forests with much coniferisation or are sharply marked off from intensive arable land; where they remain unenclosed, as in the New Forest, heavy grazing prevents expansion. Finally, there remains the possibility that the three kinds of beech forest in Britain are themselves related in a serai sequence, the Fagus-Rubus woodland developing from the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland and progressing to the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland, the process being assisted by the dominance of beech itself. Duchaufour (1950) has proposed that the establishment of a beech cover plays some part in the evolution of rendzinas to brown earths on the Lorraine Jurassic limestones but, in the Chilterns, Avery (1958) could adduce little evidence for progression beyond calcareous lithomorphic soils on drift-free Chalk, more acidic profiles being primarily related to the presence of superficials and largely inde pendent of whether there was a cover of beech woodland. Over calcareous drift, matters are not quite so clear. Here, brown calcareous soils (which typically carry the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland) and brown earths (usually with the Fagus-Rubus woodland) may well represent successive stages of leaching and suggest a succession of one community by the other. Certainly, the floristic boundary between these two woodlands can be very indistinct but this is much affected by differences in the superficials and topography (Avery 1958): again, such pedogenic variation also occurs outside beech forests, notably between calcicolous and calcifuge grasslands on limestone brows. Development of the Fagus-Rubus woodland to the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland is likewise unattested. Mor accummulation and the development of micropodzols certainly occur under beech in the Fagus-Rubus woodland, both in the Chilterns (Watt 19346, Brown 1953, Avery 1958) and the New Forest (Dimbleby & Gill 1955, Tubbs 1968) but, once more, variation in parent materials and topography play a part and a beech canopy is not a necessary pre-requisite: even when Fagus is present, how it is treated may be very important (Avery 1958). On balance, podzolisation under the Fagus-Rubus woodland does not seem to be widespread or progressive. Distribution "