"w15","Zonation and succession Two kinds of zonation are commonly found within stands of the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland. The first relates to differences in canopy shade and it can be a direct reflection of the maturation of the vegetation, with the Calluna sub-community occupying recently- colonised ground, the Fagus sub-community forming dense woodland in the establishment phase, the Des champsia or Vaccinium sub-community occurring where the canopy has begun to open up a little and the Calluna sub-community marking gaps. In fact, actively-colonising Fagus-Deschampsia woodlands are of rather res tricted occurrence and, in commercial forests, natural gap formation is pre-empted, re-establishment is from planted stock and the resultant stands have trees of uniform age with a more homogeneous field layer. Here, then, the patterning of the different sub-communities is much more regular in both space and time with sharply- defined compartments of the Fagus sub-community before thinning, the Deschampsia or Vaccinium sub community after, and the Calluna sub-community making only a brief appearance between rotations apart from along the edges of rides where it may mark a transition to a narrow strip of heath or bracken without trees. Characteristically, the outer margins of such treated stands are sharply defined with an abrupt switch to other types of forest (often conifer-dominated stands of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland) or to surrounding agricultural land. The other kind of zonation relates to the intensity of grazing or browsing. Sometimes differences in the pres ent pattern of access by herbivores can be seen in a change from the Deschampsia to the Vaccinium sub community at an artificial stock- and deer-proof boundary; in other cases, the structure of the vegetation itself may hinder access, creating protected enclaves (as in some stands surrounded by a ring of holly, a feature in parts of the New Forest: Tubbs 1968) or a diffuse mosaic of more-and less-grazed areas with these two sub communities. Such patterns can be found in some ancient Forests and parks and they often also involve more open glades with the Calluna sub-community and stretches of heath where the establishment of a woody cover is held in check by the herbivores. Withdrawal of grazing in such situations (and the cessation of burning or the cutting of heather and bracken, once important on commons in the south) may allow more gradual zonations to develop in which light penetration through the canopy becomes the primary factor in determining the distribution of the sub-communities. In fact, woodpasture landscapes usually present complex patchworks of the various kinds of Fagus-Deschampsia woodland related to the interplay of grazing and shading, both at the present time and in the past, as Peterken & Tubbs (1965) showed in the New Forest. Mosaics of this kind, developed over fairly uniform podzolised soils, also frequently involve tracts of woodland in which beech is so poorly represented in proportion to oak and birch that the vegetation is best con sidered part of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland. The relative ease with which these trees out perform beech in the early colonisation of open ground means that this community often functions as a serai precursor to the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland, interposed between calcifugous grassland, heath and bracken on the one hand and mature beech forest on the other, both in time and in spatial zonations. The Quer- cus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland can also be a tem porary replacement for the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland in larger gaps and clearings, before beech re establishes by seeding in around the margins or is planted in; and, where Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland seems more permanently ensconced, there is sometimes an assumption that it occupies ground that, had it not suffered gross disturbance, would naturally carry Fagus-Deschampsia woodland (e.g. Géhu 1975«). In fact, even within the native range of beech in Britain, this tree is rather slow to assert or reassert its dominance in these situations: on newly-colonised ground, the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland often seems to attain a stability of its own; and, even when beech is abundant in the immediate neighbourhood, it has some difficulty in getting away in larger gaps. It may therefore be too simplistic to regard the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland as the natural climax forest on more surface- leached soils in southern Britain: if anything, it is beech, with its unreliable fruiting and poor seed-dispersal, which requires a measure of assistance to succeed, a fact borne in on practitioners of the selection system of treatment (Brown 1953, 1964), and one invoked to explain the tardy and limited migration of this tree in the post-Glacial period in Britain (e.g. Godwin 1975). And, even where beech has become well established on such profiles, it may be more accurate to see its dominance as under a measure of threat from oak and birch, such that slowly-shifting patchworks of Fagus-Deschampsia and Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodlands are a quite natural feature, moved towards the former community by selection for beech, in favour of the latter wherever there is opportunity for expansion of the forest cover. There may also be room for some reassessment of the status of the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland in relation to its counterpart on less base-poor brown earths, the Fagus-Rubus woodland. In general, the floristic distinchttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press258 Woodlands and scrub tions between these two communities are better defined than those between the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland and its oak-birch analogue, having a firm foundation in edaphic differences. Transitions from the one community to the other can sometimes be observed within individual stands, beech-dominance being maintained throughout, but the field and ground layers showing a marked change with the switch from leached brown earths with mull to podzols with mor, a zonation forming part of the soil-vegetation series described from the Chilterns (Watt 19346, Avery 1958) but also seen in more complex mosaics in the New Forest (Tubbs 1968). As noted earlier, however, small-scale variation in topography and parent materials may make this kind of transition quite ill defined, so that again patchworks of the two communities are a fairly normal feature. It is also possible that, in more marginal situations, there is some measure of cyclical alternation in time between the Fagus-Deschampsia and Fagus-Rubus woodlands at any one place. Despite the fact that beech can encourage the formation of mor and thus favour the development of soil conditions inimical to the survival of some of its characteristic associates in the Fagus-Rubus woodland, this is not necessarily a progressive and irreversible process, indeed it seems to be best favoured by certain treatments of beech, rather than being a wholly natural development (Avery 1958). And, once again, it may be that, in less strictly-treated high forest, oak and birch play an important part here because with Rubus underscrub, they can pre-empt beech in gaps, allow the spread of a more extensive field layer in their less dense shade and perhaps shift the edaphic and vegetational balance back to less extreme conditions. Along both its boundaries with other woodland types, the soil-related junction with the Fagus-Rubus woodland and the competi- tive/successional one with the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, the relationships of the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland are thus more complex than they seem at first sight. Distribution "