"w16","Zonation and succession Zonations from this community to other kinds of woodland are most frequently related to differences in soils. Quite often, these are complicated by the effects of sylvicultural treatments and the impact of larger herbivores, but grazing and browsing also mediate other kinds of transitions to grassland and heath which are a spatial expression of succession or its reversal. Burning is also a factor in these latter kinds of zonations. Although neglect of heathland exploitation has allowed extensive development of progressive successional change in some areas, many stands have artificially sharp boundaries with adjacent land converted to agri cultural use. Edaphically-related transitions usually reflect changes to soil parent materials that are not so markedly acidic or pervious (commonly both) as those which typically weather to the humic rankers and podzolised profiles characteristic here. Such changes are very common within whole woods in which this community is represented and they most often result in zonations to the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, the forest type of base-poor brown earths, frequently with some drainage-impedence, in the British lowlands. Boundaries between the two communities are not always very sharp, especially where superficials provide the underlying substrate. Fluvioglacial deposits, for example, and aeolian material are commonly very heterogeneous, even over short distances, and, in parts of the Midlands, in Suffolk and Essex and in some areas of the New Forest, small-scale variation in the proportions of sand, silt and clay may be sufficient to produce mosaics of brown earths or brown sands and podzols which bear patchworks of these two kinds of woodlands, in these regions usually the Typical sub-community of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland and the Quercus sub community of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland. The distribution of more mesophytic species characteristic of the former and the calcifuge herbs of the latter often provides a firm diagnosis of the components but, by mid-summer, when the vernal dominance of Hyacinthoides has faded from the Quercus-Pteridium- Rubus woodland and a dense canopy of bracken extends throughout, the distinctions may be masked. Uniform treatment as wood-pasture, which can eliminate most of the understorey, and pollarding throughout, can cause further confusion. Oak coppice sometimes extends over such boundaries, though the post-coppice floras in actively-treated stands of each of the two communities can indicate the underlying soil differences afresh. Cop picing for hazel, largely confined to the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, may actually highlight the transition. Where these kinds of soil differences are related to changes in sedimentary rocks, the zonation between the two kinds of woodland can be a much sharper one. Interbedded clays are a characteristic feature among the Cretaceous sands and sandstones of the Weald and they occur, too, within the Eocene sequences of Essex and the New Forest. Similar alternations are found further north in the Triassic deposits of the Midlands. All of these can carry bands of the Quercus sub-community of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland and the Typical sub-community of the Quercus-Pteridium- Rubus woodland, the former usually above the latter on the more resistant topography of the arenaceous rocks, giving way below to the more weathered argillaceous slopes. On the Pennine fringes this kind of geological and topographic contrast, reflected in the soils and woodland cover, is even more striking with Carboniferous sandstones and grits forming cliffs and screes with the Vaccinium-Dryopteris sub-community, giving way below to the Acer-Oxalis sub-community of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland on shales. Edaphic var iation over the extensive and varied grit exposures may also here introduce much more field-layer variation into the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland than is usual over the gentler topography of the southern lowlands. Quite a common complication, too, is for landslips to occur where incompetent shales collapse and spill down great blocks of the overlying grits on to the lower slopes: then perched fragments of the calcifuge flora of the community may occur among a ground of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, a striking sight in spring when a carpet of bluebells runs up between them. Very often, on shedding slopes, these junctions between arenaceous and argillaceous sedimentaries are marked by flushing, as ground waters percolating through the sands, sandstones or grits hit the impervious clays or shales and emerge in springs or seepage lines. Then the transition from the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland to the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland can have some kind of interposed flush woodland, frequently of small extent, though often occurring repeatedly along the geological boundary. Where the flush waters are not too base-poor, the Carex-Cirsium sub-community of the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland is typical in such situations, being a common feature in the western Weald and along Pennine valley sides; where they are more acid, frequently the case to the north where they drain from expanses of moorland, the Juncus sub-community of the Betula-Molinia woodland replaces it in analogous topographic situations. https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press272 Woodlands and scrub Where flush waters emerge at such geological junctions within more level-bedded rocks and maintain the soils over the clays and shales in a more permanently waterlogged state, some surface peat may accumulate. Then, these kinds of flush woodland are replaced by their topogenous equivalents, the Carex-Alnus woodland in more base-rich sites (usually the Chrysosplenium sub-community), the Sphagnum sub-community of the Betula-Molinia woodland in the more base-poor. Often, the stands of these kinds of wet woodland are more extensive than their flush counterparts, sometimes wholly replacing the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland in its position below the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland. Again, the western Weald and the Pennine fringes have good examples of this kind of pattern. The other very common kind of zonation in which this woodland can be found involves transitions to heaths, or to complexes of heath with calcifugous grasslands and stands of bracken. The type of heath occurring in association with the community varies considerably according to the region: over the range of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland, heaths show wide phytogeographic differences. In East Anglia and down into parts of the Weald, the Calluna-Festuca heath is typical, then from there westwards the Calluna-Ulex minor and Ulex minor-Agrostis curtisii heaths and, in the north Midlands, the Calluna-Ulex gallii heath. In the Pennines, the Calluna-Deschampsia and Calluna- Vaccinium heaths are the usual companions. Sometimes the zonations from woodland to heath are well ordered and have some clear basis in topographic and edaphic variation, as where tree cover becomes very sparse over fragmentary humic rankers on grit boulders or cliffs in the Pennines (e.g. Moss 1913, Pigott 1956/>), but very often such patterns are more complex and independent of substrates and soils. Frequently, here, fragments of heath occur within stretches of the woodland, confined to gaps or forming larger areas in the kind of landscape seen in some ancient wood-pastures (e.g. Hopkinson 1927, Mackney 1961, Rackham 1980, Peterken 1981), or stands of the woodland are distributed among extensive tracts of heath, as on the Wealden and Surrey commons and in parts of the New Forest (e.g. Tansley 1939, Wooldridge & Goldring 1953). And in such situations, it is usually abundantly clear that the zonations are an expression of serai progression to woodland or its reconversion to heath as a result of a variety of biotic activities. Thus, heath sub-shrubs and Pteridium form the characteristic gap or coppice flora here, developing where trees fall or are extracted or cut as underwood. And these plants can spread at the expense of a tree cover in the immediate aftermath of destruction of the community by fire. Grazing and browsing may work more slowly, though to the same ultimate end: a very open canopy of trees can persist in wood-pasture stands of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland for cen turies, but with no hope of unaided regeneration if access to herbivores is maintained, a situation seen only too well in some old Forests and parks (Peterken & Tubbs 1965, Rackham 1980, Peterken 1981). Where the community has declined in extent or vigour, then, or where its expansion has been checked, it is these factors, working separately or often in complex combinations (e.g. Peterken & Tubbs 1965, Peterken 1969, 1981, Rackham 1980), that seem generally to blame, rather than any natural demise in the face of extreme edaphic conditions (cf. Tansley 1911, 1939) or a harsh climate (Pigott 1983). Moreover, the ability of the community to regenerate and colonise new ground has been observed with striking clarity wherever and whenever the inci dence of these factors has declined, the neglect of the exploitation of heathy commons being especially important in the recent extensive spread of this kind of woodland in the south-east. However, though the community seems to be a quite natural development from heaths at the present time, two questions arise over its status. The first is of longterm historical interest and concerns the possibility that, in many areas, heath vegetation has prepared the ground for the spread of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland by enhancing podzolisation on land that was previously of higher fertility and perhaps bore more mesophytic forest but which was progressively exhausted by early agricultural activity (e.g. Dimbleby & Gill 1955, Dimbleby 1962, Gimingham 1972). This may well have been the case in some places but whether it has everywhere been a necessary precondition is another matter. The community can certainly maintain podzols in a stable state (Mackney 1961, Pigott 1983) and oak-birch forest of this kind may itself be able to promote podzolisation (Scheys et al. 1954, Munault 1959). The second issue concerns the stability of the community in relation to its beech-dominated analogue, the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland, in particular the competitive ability of oak and beech on the markedly dry, acid soils characteristic of both communities. On moister soils of low base-status, Fagus is at some disadvantage against Q. robur (Watt 1924, 1934Z?), so the distinction between the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus and the Fagus-Rubus woodlands often has a clear edaphic basis in semi-natural woods within the natural range of beech. Here, oak and beech are more closely matched in their potential ability to dominate, each is found in stands where the other is pre-eminent and, in those areas where both communities are well represented, as in the New Forest (Peterken & Tubbs 1965, Tubbs 1968) and parts of the Chilterns (Watt 1934Z>, Avery 1958), inti https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.021 Published online by Cambridge University PressW16 Quercus spp.-Betula spp.-Deschampsia flexuosa woodland 273 mate mosaics of the two are common. A number of factors are probably important in determining which species will come to prevail. First, though Fagus grows well way beyond its natural limit to the north, there may be some climatic restriction on its vigour towards the drier parts of East Anglia (Rackham 1980). Second, outside this area, Fagus is still a very erratic fruiter and oak, certainly Q. robur, though itself not very consistent in acorn production, has the advantage that its fruits can be transported over considerable distances, whereas beech mast generally drops straight down off the parent (Watt 1924, Jones 1959, Mellanby 1968). In larger gaps, therefore, and on previously open ground, colonisation by oak, as against beech, is more widespread and more regular, though grazing and browsing, which favour the latter, can offset this (Dengler 1930, Jones 1959). Third, under closed canopies, the advantage moves in the other direction (provided adult beech is present and has produced mast) because Q. robur regenerates badly under established woodland and beech seedlings and saplings are more shade-tolerant than those of Q. petraea. Here, then, beech may triumph eventually (Watt 1924, 19346), even well outside its range (Pigott 1983). The outcome of such conflicting factors may, in many places and at any given time, be a fairly even match so that the dominants, and their communities, form a mosaic, each coming and going, here and there, in a complex pattern of regenerative replacement. On the Continent, the consensus of opinion is that the equivalents of the Fagus-Deschampsia woodland represent the climax on the kinds of soil characteristic here, the counterparts of the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland, their serai precursors or degraded derivatives (e.g. Géhu 1 975 æ) and, given ideal conditions for beech, this may well be the situation here. Often, however, con ditions are not ideal so that the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland, though theoretically a sub-climax, attains a considerable measure of stability. The other tree species which frequently complicates successions to this community is Pinus sylvestris which is widely distributed as an ornamental in this kind of woodland and extensively planted on lowland podzols. It fruits heavily, has light wind-dispersed seeds and does especially well, with birch, as a coloniser of open ground after fires have cleared a cover of bracken and heath (e.g. Tubbs 1968). Where its canopy remains open or where it is present in mixed covers of trees, the vegetation can retain the general character of the community but densely-shaded stands of pine quickly eliminate vir tually all the field-layer species and bryophytes. The same poverty is characteristic of plantations of P. sylvestris and other conifers on the soils typical here, though thinning may restore some of the richness of the vege tation (such as it is). Often, now, in intensively afforested areas, the Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland is reduced to a fringe of birch, bracken and ericoids along the edges of rides and on recently-cleared compartments. The generally poor quality of the soils under the community means that conversion of this kind of woodland to intensive agricultural land is exceptional. Quite commonly, stands have been reduced to isolated rem nants but they usually persist, outside the heathland or wood-pasture context, in pastoral landscapes, marked off sharply from some kind of improved grassland, either various types of Festuca-Agrostis sward or more calcifugous sub-communities of mesotrophic grassland. Narrow strips of bracken, ericoids or Ulex spp. may occur as a compressed fringe around the woodland. Distribution "