"w17","Zonation and succession Zonations between the different types of Quercus- Betula-Dicranum woodland and from this community to other vegetation types are most commonly related to differences in microclimate, topography and soils and grazing and, as explained above, all these factors can interact in complex fashion, often in an inter-dependent way, so it is quite rare to find simply-explicable transitions. The edaphic trend within the community is essentially one of soil maturity, running from lithomorphic rankers, such as are typical of the Isothecium-Diplophyllum sub-community, to the deeper, more stable and mature brown podzolic soils and podzols characteristic of the other sub-communities. To the west, such a trend is often visible in terms of a zonation from the former over the rocky ground of crags and screes to either the Typical sub-community (in less heavily grazed woods) or the Anthoxanthum-Agrostis sub-community (in hea vily-grazed woods) on downwash soils over the gentler slopes below. And, on a smaller scale, the pattern may be repeated over the variably-sloping surfaces of every large boulder in differences in the stability and composition of the bryophyte mat. Between the two zones, there can be very complex mosaics as stretches of deeper soil run up between boulders and become fragmented https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press290 Woodlands and scrub into pockets between and atop the rocks; and, in the other direction, as boulders become progressively more isolated and sunken into the body of the creep soils. And such zonations are frequently complicated by climatically-related responses in the vegetation, so that shifts towards a more southerly, sunnier aspect may increase the proportion of ground occupied by either the Typical or Anthoxanthum-Agrostis sub-communities (especially perhaps the latter as lack of cool shade may depress Vaccinium and enhance the grass cover); or, conversely, a move towards more northerly aspects may produce a greater contribution from the Isothecium-Diplophyllum sub-community. Especially complex patterns may be found in landscapes cleft by repeated ravines, where alternating zones may lie side by side along a slope and where, within each gorge, there is a small-scale and almost unfathomable jumble of vegetation disposed over cliffs, ledges, tumbled blocks and slips of soil. Quite commonly in the situations where the Quercus- Betula-Dicranum woodland is found, edaphic zonations continue to less base-poor profiles, usually strongly- leached brown earths. Such a transition can be related to a change in the underlying bedrock from more coarsegrained arenaceous sedimentaries or igneous or metamorphic rocks to more fine-grained ones which weather to a less readily leached mantle: this kind of switch is a fairly common feature in Silurian and Ordovician sequences in Wales and the Lake District and among volcanic rocks in the Lakes and parts of Scotland (e.g. Pearsall 1968, Pearsall & Pennington 1973). In such cases, the associated edaphic and vegetational changes can be sudden and clearly marked but, very often, it is the presence of superficials, like glacial drift or head, or the effect of flushing, that shifts the direction of soil development by masking the effect of the underlying acidic rocks and then the edaphic and vegetational gradient is much more gradual and ill defined. Typically, though, in all these situations, the Quercus-Betula- Dicranum woodland gives way, with varying degrees of sharpness, to the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland, with a decline in ericoids and more calcifugous herbs and bryophytes and an increase in Hyacinthoides, Rubus and Holcus mollis. But uniformly intense grazing over these boundaries may soften the transition and, even where there is no grazing, very much the same kind of tree canopy extends over both communities with even Cor ylus providing no sure guide as to the move from one to the other (Figure 21). The juxtaposition of highly acidic and markedly basic rocks, or the presence of very calcareous drift over siliceous substrates, or strong flushing with very baserich waters, all of which can occur locally within the range of the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland, result in a sharper shift from the community to either the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland or, in very wet situations, the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland. Then there is often a much more obvious floristic difference among all elements of the vegetation with calcicolous species replacing the calcifugous. In some areas though, extreme climatic conditions produce a convergence among certain components: this is well seen in the Suardal area of Skye where stands of all three of these communities, and of the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland on intermediate soils, occur under scrubby canopies of B. pubescens, S. aucuparia and Corylus and with a prominent western element among the bryophytes (Birks 1973). As well as confounding the simplicity of these kinds of zonations, grazing and browsing also produce transitions of their own which are essentially a reflection of the successional development of the community or, very commonly, its reversal. Burning is also frequently involved as a factor in such zonations. Serai progressions to the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland have not been followed (they are rare, of course, and now often seen only in fenced sections of reserves or in forestry or reservoir enclosures) but the most obvious natural precursors to the community are probably the Luzula sylvatica-Vaccinium myrtillus tail-herb vegetation and certain kinds of Calluna-Vaccinium heath. Both of these show considerable overlap with the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland in their edaphic and climatic requirements and essentially reproduce ele ments of its field and ground layers: McVean & Ratcliffe (1962) included stands of the Luzula-Vaccinium community as a ‘treeless facies ’ of the woodland. Small stands of these rich vegetation types can sometimes be found in close spatial association with the community and, like it, survive as fragments within much-modified landscapes. They also extend the typical sub-shrub, herb and bryophyte cover characteristic of the community to considerably higher altitudes than those at which the woodland itself is found. In fact, much more widespread are zonations to more species-poor kinds of Calluna-Vaccinium heath (in which bryophytes in particular are ill-represented), vari ous types of calcifugous grasslands (notably less- improved Festuca-Agrostis-Galium swards) and stands of the Pteridium-Galium saxatile community, in land scapes which bear obvious signs of a long history of woodland clearance, grazing, burning and agricultural neglect. Quite often, the sequence of such vegetation types reflects the kind of underlying edaphic variation, running down from crags and screes over thin soils to colluvium, that can be seen picked out in the surviving woodland by the spatial sorting of Vaccinium myrtillus, grasses and bracken, though the proportional contribution of the last is often much greater with freedom from canopy shade on the open slopes. Fragments of the bryophyte-richness of the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland may persist in derived Calluna-Vaccinium heath, though burning is very deleterious, and, among https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.022 Published online by Cambridge University PressW17 Quercus petraea-Betula pubescens-Dicranum majus woodland 291 the sward of the plagioclimax Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland, continuous grazing and increased exposure to sun and wind can eliminate all but the more robust mosses; less intractable slopes may also have been improved by fertiliser application. Dense bracken stands, too, are usually impoverished: ericoids and herbs may persist patchily but the bryophytes are rapidly reduced by the combination of deep shade and thick litter. Finally, one very common additional element of these altered landscapes is coniferous forest which has been widely planted in the north-western uplands on soils which could otherwise support this community. Such woodlands have not been extensively sampled, though more open stands could probably be incorporated here as impoverished variants. In some parts of Scotland, there is the further problem of the relationship between the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland and what seems, from palynological evidence, to be the natural forest cover of the region, the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland (e.g. McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birks 1970, Gunson 1975, O’Sullivan 1977). There is a considerable floristic overlap between the associated species of these two woodland types and what may have happened here, with the destruction of the original, and apparently fairly mixed, woody cover of the pine forest is that birch and oak, especially the former, have now come to dominate in the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland on the more acidic mineral soils that could naturally support pine. Distribution "