"w18","Zonation and succession The Pinus-Hylocomium woodland on Creag Fhiaclach in the Cairngorms is probably one of the very few stands of forest vegetation in Britain where trees can be seen growing at a natural, climatically-related altitudinal limit. Here, the community gives way, through a gradual loss of its pine cover, to the more calcifugous kind of Juniperus-Oxalis woodland, the characteristic montane scrub vegetation in the east-central Highlands of Scotland. Below this limit, and almost down to sea-level, the community survives as scattered stands in a number of geographical groupings, within some of which it constitutes a major element of the vegetation cover. In considering zonations, it is important to distinguish between such expanses of ‘pine forest ’, defined on broad landscape criteria and containing a wide variety of vegetation types, including many non-wooded ones, and the stands of the different kinds of Pinus-Hylocomium woodland which form part of the mosaic. Zonations within stands of the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland, between one sub-community and another, are generally related to edaphic variation and/or the density of the tree cover. In some places, notably the Speyside and Deeside forests, transitions from the Vac cinium sub-community to the Sphagnum-Erica sub community can be seen as one moves from drier podzols to peaty podzols, a change that is often related on a broad scale to a shift to higher altitudes with their wetter climate. And, here and in the south-western forests around the Great Glen, there can be zonations from these sub-communities to the Luzula type where the soils become moderately enriched over less extreme sub strates or because of gentle flushing. Gradations from the Vaccinium or Luzula sub-communities to the Sphagnum-Erica sub-community are also typically associated with a decrease in the density of the pine canopy and the effect of this can be seen, too, over more uniformly dry soils, where the Erica-Goodyera sub-community passes to the Vaccinium sub community as the canopy thins out. Indeed, such changes can be precipitated by thinning, and, in seminatural stands, may represent a serai progression (see below). Where a general uniformity in soil conditions is maintained, continued reduction in the pine cover usually marks a gradual zonation to some kind of heath, typically various sub-communities of the Calluna- Vaccinium heath (the floristic composition of which is essentially a Pinus-Hylocomium woodland without the pine) or the Calluna-Arctostaphylos uva-ursihzatiy quite often a mosaic of both where burning patterns have been complex (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Where the ground conditions are moister, a frequent feature among stands of the Sphagnum-Erica sub-community towards the wetter west, these dry heaths are replaced in this kind of sequence by the Scirpus-Erica wet heath, a very widespread community of thin ombrogenous peats and the fringes of valley mires in western Britain. On such wetter ground, growth of P. sylvestris is much poorer (Carlisle & Brown 1968), so the zonation is essentially an https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.023 Published online by Cambridge University PressW18 Pinus sylvestris-Hylocomium splendens woodland 309 edaphic one rather than a serai one, though drainage and fertilising has often artificially extended the range of pine on to such soils in Scotland (and, of course, elsewhere outside the natural range of the tree). Where such wet heath becomes wooded, Betula pubescens is usually the leading coloniser (often the only one) and extension of its canopy can lead to the development of stands of the Betula-Molinia woodland among the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland, a situation marked by a strong continuity in the field layer with species such as Molinia caerulea, Erica tetralix and Sphagna remaining prominent in both communities. Transitions to even wetter ground in valley and basin mires, which are quite a common feature among the complex undulating topography of fluvioglacial deposits, involve the occurrence of small stands of basepoor communities like the Carex echinata-Sphagnum or Carex rostrata-Sphagnum mires, or, where these have been colonised by trees, the Betula-Molinia or Salix- Carex woodlands. Where there is a local influence of more base-rich waters, the Pinguiculo-Caricetum and Carici-Saxifragetum mires can be found, or their wooded equivalent the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland. Within the areas where the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland is represented, all these different kinds of soil-related zonations can often be found within a relatively small compass, a feature which adds greatly to the overall diversity of the vegetation and contributes to the unique assemblage of communities which we include within the broader landscape definition of pine forest. Over the range of soil types represented within what seems to be the natural range of P. sylvestris in Britain, it is probably able to colonise and attain dominance on a fairly broad spectrum of more freely draining brown earths, brown podzolic soils and podzols and, in such situations, its natural precursors are probably the vari ous dry and wet heaths with which it can be found associated today. Where invasion has been observed, an initial slow start within the sub-shrub canopy, followed by some period of check through herbivore damage, has been succeeded by fairly rapid growth to produce vegetation resembling the Erica-Goodyera or Vaccinium sub communities or, where the initial density of seedlings was more sparse, the Sphagnum-Erica type (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). In some places, it is possible that the latter sub-community can develop from the former in a serai progression (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962), though it seems likely that there is some edaphic and climatic check on which direction succession takes: there may be two types of climax pinewood, one in the drier low- altitude eastern region, the other at higher altitudes there and in the wetter west. What does seem certain is that, in the past, progressions to pine woodland involved a greater contribution from other tree species, notably birch and juniper, which continued to be well represented in mosaics of forest, at least in the eastern Highlands of Scotland. Now, we see some greater separation in the roles which these species play. Birch-dominated calcifugous forest (often with some oak, derived in part from planted stock) of the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodland, survives as dis tinct stands within the areas of pine forest and finds fragmentary representation in gaps, but it also seems to have sprung up widely on ground that mixed pine forest previously occupied. And the Juniperus-0xalis woodland, though also represented among stands of the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland, now survives largely in isolation at higher altitudes. The original patchworks of mixed dominance may have been of some considerable importance in tempering the tendency towards podzolisation, birch and juniper being less active encouragers of mor than pine, and the greater extent of the forest cover must certainly have restricted the spread of Calluna, the abundance of which among the heaths of eastern Scot land may be very deleterious for any future expansion of pine. Distribution "