"w19","Zonation and succession Zonations between the two sub-communities of the Juniperus-0xalis woodland are most frequently a reflection of edaphic variation. Soil differences are involved, too, in transitions from the community to other vege tation types but, throughout, grazing, burning and timber removal have confused these patterns. Complex treatment histories also make it difficult to see how the community relates to other vegetation types in serai sequences and in natural altitudinal zonations of climax communities. Soil variations within stands of the Juniperus-0xalis woodland are generally related to differences in parent materials or the degree of flushing, with the Vaccinium- Deschampsia sub-community typically giving way to the Viola-Anemone sub-community wherever there is an increase in base-richness and fertility. Sometimes, as where there is an abrupt and marked shift in bedrock type, the edaphic and vegetational contrasts are sharp; often, especially where the community occurs over heterogenous superficials or experiences diffuse flushing, the change is a much more gradual one, manifest in ill-defined mosaics rather than clear zonations, a feature very well seen over the complex geology of the Morrone Birkwoods (Huntley & Birks 1979«, b). Often, now, the landscape context of stands of the Juniperus-Oxalis woodland is one dominated by various types of heath or grassland and, at lower altitudes, it is clear that the vegetation pattern is strongly related to biotic factors, partly deer-grazing but also various kinds of human interference. Nonetheless, zonations often preserve a measure of edaphic control. For example, transitions to Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath sometimes reflect an obvious move to drier and more strongly podzolised profiles, a switch which is sometimes related to the occurrence of highly siliceous parent materials or a complete waning of any impact of flushing with base rich waters (e.g. Huntley & Birks 1979«). In other cases, this type of soil and vegetation zonation is a reflection of slope and aspect: in the east-central Highlands, the Juniperus-0xalis woodland sometimes marks out damp hollows and north-facing slopes in tracts of heather moorland (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). In the opposite direction, on free-draining soils which are increasingly base-rich and calcareous, the community typically passes to some kind of calcicolous sward, often preferentially grazed by deer and stock because of its nutritious bite. On limestone or schist outcrops in the Dalradian and Moine rocks of eastern Scotland, such zonations https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press322 Woodlands and scrub usually involve the Festuca-Agr os tis-Thy mus grassland (e.g. Huntley & Birks 1979«); in Teesdale, with the switch from intruded Whin Sill dolerite to Carboniferous Limestone, the Sesleria-Galium grassland is represented (e.g. Pigott 1956tz, Graham 1971, Gilbert 1980). In situations such as these, the Juniperus-Oxalis woodland occupies the moister sites, where aspect or seepage prevent the development of excessively-draining soils. In other cases, as where heavy-textured superficials dominate among the parent materials, it may mark out better-drained areas, passing to various kinds of mires in hollows where there is ground-water gleying or a strong influence of soligenous waters. At Morrone, for example, a complex of flush communities occurs among the Juniperus-Oxalis woodlands with Pingui- culo-Caricetum mire figuring prominently in more baserich situations, the Scirpus-Erica wet heath in the more base-poor (Huntley & Birks 1979a). In the absence of enclosure experiments or any sus tained observations on the effects of burning within such sequences as these, it is difficult to know how far the limits of the Juniperus-Oxalis woodland are natural. However, waterlogging is strongly inimical to juniper, so the absence of the community from more hydromorphic soils probably represents a real edaphic boundary though, if there were no grazing, one might expect the Juniperus-Oxalis woodland to give way to mire scrub or forest in such situations, perhaps the Alnus-Fraxinus- Lysimachia woodland in more base-rich places or the Salix-Carex woodland in the less. On drier soils, grazing and burning have almost certainly reduced the extent of the community, the former favouring an extension of grasslands, the latter, especially on more base-poor profiles, encouraging a spread of heaths, and especially the dominance of Calluna. In many sites, the composition of the Vaccinium-Deschampsia heath adjacent to the community is very similar (essentially it is often Juniperus-Oxalis woodland without the juniper) and the balance between ericoids and juniper in the invasion process after burning may be quite a fine one. Information on the precise effects of burning and herbivore predation is urgently needed for the sensitive conservation of this community. It would also enable us to see something of the serai processes in which juniper is involved and to assess the successional status of the community. To the north of its British range, juniper obviously colonises and maintains itself on a much broader spectrum of soil types than is the case in the southern lowlands and, in more natural circumstances, the community may develop along a number of serai pathways. Early invasion of very open habitats with fragmentary soils could be the normal mode of establishment for this light-demanding tree, in which case its colonisation of existing ungrazed herbaceous vegetation might depend on erosion on steeper slopes or clearance of the ground by spontaneous fires (e.g. Fitter & Jennings 1975, Miles & Kinnaird 1979). Over rocky ground and on ledges, juniper can also invade coincidentally with ferns, ericoids and tall herbs, occasionally finding a place in vegetation types like the Luzula- Vaccinium and Luzula-Geum communities (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Huntley & Birks 1979a). These ungrazed communities show a considerable floristic overlap with the Juniperus- Oxalis woodland, the former, characteristic of more base-poor rocks, resembling the Vaccinium-Deschampsia sub-community, the latter, typical of more base-rich situations, sharing many species with the Viola-Anemone sub-community. Where juniper is able to overtop the associates, it essentially converts the vegetation to the Juniperus-Oxalis woodland, though stands on ledges are very fragmentary. Subsequent developments probably depend on a number of factors. In theory, one would expect stands at lower altitudes to progress to forest dominated by pine and/or birch, with the Vaccinium-Deschampsia sub community on more acidic, impoverished soils moving to the Quercus-Betula-Dicranum or Pinus-Hylocomium woodlands, the Viola-Anemone sub-community on more base-rich and fertile soils to the Quercus-Betula- Oxalis woodland or the Luzula sub-community of the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland. In some places, the different kinds of Juniperus-Oxalis woodland can be seen in gaps within these other woodland types, the field layers showing considerable continuity. In fact, re invasion of junipers and ericoid-dominated covers is very difficult for both pine and birch, because they are light-demanding, and with pine there is the additional problem of rather erratic fruiting and a less efficient wind-dispersal of seed than is the case with birch (Carlisle & Brown 1968, Carlisle 1977). Grazing can open up the ground but destroys seedlings; burning without grazing may be more effective but tends to allow Calluna to invade first; and widespread removal of timber, especially common and more critical with pine, has reduced the number of seed-parents. Just such a combination of factors seems to have converted the original patchwork of pine, birch and juniper forests in the east central Highlands to the pattern of woodland fragments among extensive tracts of heath and grassland that we see today (e.g. McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, O’Sullivan 1977). Widespread forest destruction has also left very few places where the Juniperus-Oxalis woodland can be seen as a convincing altitudinal replacement for sub-montane forest: the best site is probably Creag Fhiaclach where the community forms a scrubby fringe between the Pinus-Hylocomium woodland and montane heath (McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). Elsewhere, though, the Juniperus-Oxalis woodland does persist as a fragmentary belt above a wide zone now largely converted to heath and grassland (Watt & Jones 1948, Poore & McVean 1957, McVean & Ratcliffe 1962). In such https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.024 Published online by Cambridge University PressW19 Juniperus communis ssp. communis-Oxalis acetosella woodland 323 situations as these, the community occupies an analogous position to the juniper scrub of the ‘lower-alpine ’ zone in Scandinavia (Du Rietz & Du Rietz 1925, Nordhagen 1943). As there, though in much more fragmentary fashion, it shares this zone with scrub dominated by Arctic-Alpine willows like Salix lapponum, S. myrsinites and S. reticulata which replaces the Juniperus-0xalis woodland on wetter soils but has quite a strong floristic overlap with the Viola-Anemone sub-community. On the highly acidic rocks of the north-western parts of Scotland, this altitudinal zone is characterised by a scrubby heath in which J. communis ssp. nana plays a major role. Distribution "