"w2","Zonation and succession In the more extensive flood-plain mires of the Broadland river valleys, it is still possible to see complete and fairly straightforward zonations from open-water vegetation, through swamp and primary fen, to the Salix-Betula- Phragmites woodland, over fen peats which are increasingly free from inundation by the seasonally-fluctuating waters (e.g. Pallis 1911, Lambert & Jennings 1951, Wheeler 1980c, 1983). Where the base-status and calcareous nature of the peat are maintained, such sequences involve the Alnus-Filipendula sub-community which replaces, beyond the upper limit of the winter flood, the Peucedano-Phragmitetum, Local variations in the pattern of water fluctuation and uneven invasion of shrubs and trees frequently blur this boundary so that a hazy zone of scrubby vegetation lies between the fen and the woodland proper. There is variation, too, in the particular kind of Peucedano-Phragmitetum to be found in these zonations: along the Bure valley, for example, it is generally the Typical sub-community, dominated by Phragmites or less often and perhaps where conditions are more oligotrophic, Cladiunv, in the more eutrophic Yare fens, drier forms of the Gly ceria sub-community, usually dominated by Phragmites, are often involved. Outside Broadland, where flood-plain mires have been much fragmented and extensively drained, intact zonations of this kind are rare and such sequences as do survive generally have the less species-rich vegetation of the Phragmites-Eupatorium fen (most often its Phragmites or Cladium sub-communities) replacing the Peucedano-Phragmitetum. Less commonly, the Alnus-Filipendula sub-community may pass directly to the rather dry swamp vegetation of the Galium sub-community of the Phragmitetum. Transitions of this kind can be seen around some open waters in the Shropshire and Cheshire meres (Sinker 1962, Meres Report 1980) and in more base-rich valley mires, such as those in Breckland (e.g. Haslam 1965). Stratigraphical studies around the Norfolk Broads (Lambert & Jennings 1951, 1965, Jennings & Lambert 1951, Lambert 1951, Lambert et al. 1960, 1965) have shown that zonations of this kind can represent the progress of primary hydrarch successions in which the Alnus-Filipendula sub-community is the natural product of invasion of a variety of herbaceous fen types. This sub-community corresponds most closely with Lambert ’s ‘fen carr ’ but it also includes some of what she would have called ‘semi-swamp carr ’ and ‘pseudoswamp carr’, woodlands which differ largely in their physiognomy and whose floristics can be comfortably subsumed within this single vegetation type. Although it has not been confirmed by stratigraphical analysis or long observation elsewhere, it seems likely that this line of development represents the major succession on our more base-rich topogenous mires, except where Carex paniculata figures prominently in the primary fens. Its rate of progress is difficult to assess but comparisons of maps led Lambert & Jennings (1951) to suggest that some of the swamp around the Norfolk Broads could have progressed to woodland over 150 years and Has lam (1965) adduced a similar process to have taken some 50 years in a Breckland valley fen. In many areas, including Broadland where exploitation of the fens was formerly very intensive, such primary succession was deflected by regular mowing for herbaceous crops and many of the present stands of the Alnus-Filipendula sub-community are found as the pro duct of secondary invasion among complex patchworks of vegetation types, variation among which is more https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.007 Published online by Cambridge University PressW2 Salix cinerea-Betula pubescens-Phragmites australis woodland 59 closely related to the previous mowing regime and the date of abandonment than to natural differences in the water-level. Often, such patterns have been further complicated by other activities. Where there has been peat-digging, for example, secondary fen and woodland on the drier baulks may be intermingled with primary herbaceous vegetation and woodland developing afresh in flooded workings (e.g. Lambert & Jennings 1951, Wheeler 1978). On more isolated mire fragments, where drainage and even cultivation have occurred over the peat surface, stands of the Alnus-Filipendula sub community can be found developing from fen remnants alongside suites of other rather different vegetation types on even drier and more disturbed ground or isolated within intensive agricultural landscapes. The Sphagnum sub-community is more local than the Alnus-Filipendula sub-community and its development has not been studied but it seems to be the product of a divergent succession from the kind described above. Quite small differences in the water regime, in surface pH and nutrient status may be responsible for determining which of the two sub-communities ultimately develops and such variation may be initiated early in the succession, even before the appearance of any woodland cover. Indeed, the Sphagnum sub-community is occasionally to be found in some basin and valley mires where the whole character of the habitat is shifted somewhat towards being less base-rich and calcareous. Usually, however, it is the occurrence of such conditions on a more local scale that seems to be the prelude to its appearance. In some cases, it seems possible that the remnants of a former, more extensive cover of acid peat may provide a congenial surface (Wheeler 1978). Ombrogenous peats are known or strongly presumed to have formed within some of the East Anglian floodplain mires in the past (Godwin & Clifford 1938, Poore 1956Z>, Walker 1970) and, though these have been largely stripped away, fragments may remain. Often, however, the typically small stands of the Sphagnum sub-community give every indication of representing new ombrogenous nuclei in which surface layers of more acid peat are accumulating afresh beneath a Sphagnum cover (Wheeler 1978, 1980c, 1983). Small domes of Sphagna can sometimes be found within herbaceous fens (e.g. Pallis 1911, Tansley 1939, Wheeler 1983) and these may form the basis of subsequent stands of the Sphagnum sub-community, being preferentially invaded from the start by Betula pubescens. Such a development seems to be particularly associated with floating mats of fen vegetation like those found in various parts of the Ant valley, most distinctively in shallow peat-cuttings as on the Catfield fens (Wheeler 1978). Here, rich Phragmi- tetum appears to progress to a striking kind of Peuce- dano-Phragmitetum dominated by Carex lasiocarpa. Within this, small islands of Sphagna form and these then act as centres for B. pubescens invasion (Giller 1982, Wheeler 1983). In these fens, and among other kinds developed on solid peat, certain kinds of mowing regime may help accentuate surface impoverishment and acidification so that, once treatment ceases, con ditions are inimical to the development of the Alnus- Filipendula sub-community. In other cases, it is possible that the Sphagnum sub community makes a late appearance in the succession, developing from the Alnus-Filipendula sub-community as conditions change. Such a process may be natural, as where the accumulation of litter raises the peat surface above the level of close influence by the ground water (e.g. Godwin & Turner 1933) or, as seems to have been the case at Wicken in recent years, it may be precipitated by the artificial prevention of flooding (Godwin et al. 1974). Only close monitoring of a variety of particular stretches of fen over long periods could provide some indication of the importance of these various possibilities. In neither of the two divergent lines of succession is it clear what the final vegetation types might be. It has been suggested on a number of occasions (e.g. Godwin & Turner 1933, Tansley 1939, Lambert 1951) that some kind of oakwood is the natural development from the Alnus-Filipendula sub-community. In some sites, transitions between these two woodland types can be found but extrapolating from such sequences to serai developments is dubious because the oak woodland frequently lies on the drier land surrounding the mire where the influence of ’ts ground water had probably never been great. A more likely immediate successor to the Alnus- Filipendula sub-community is some kind of drier Alnus- Urtica woodland. The virtually complete eclipse of fen herbs in this latter community, the prominence of Urtica dioica and Rubi, the appearance of Sambucus nigra and the occurrence of a canopy in which Alnus generally predominates over Salix cinerea and Betula pubescens could be seen as natural developments over a peat surface which was being slowly converted to a humose mull with a high nutrient turnover. This kind of process seems to be in train, at least within the field layer, in Reserve A at Wicken (Godwin et al. 1974) and within the Askham woods (Fitter et al. 1980) and perhaps accounts for some of the later stages of the succession in the Breckland valley mires (Haslam 1965). The Sphagnum sub-community, on the other hand, seems more likely to progress to the Betula-Molinia woodland, in certain kinds of which Sphagna remain very prominent, along with an increased cover of Molinia caerulea, under an often moribund canopy of B. pubescens. Some of the islands of the Sphagnum sub community described from the Ant valley have a core of this kind of woodland in their drier centres (Wheeler 1978, 1980c) and such a development may also have occurred towards the back of Esthwaite North Fen in Cumbria (Pearsall 1918, Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wilson https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press60 Woodlands and scrub 1978). It is possible that such vegetation might eventually give way to ombrogenous mire with the disappearance of all tree cover, recapitulating the process that seems to have occurred in the past, even on those of our lowland mires which experience a drier climate (Pearsall 1918, Godwin & Turner 1933, Walker 1970, Wheeler 1978, 1983). The various vegetation patterns which result from the operation of these successions can be further complicated by the close proximity of the products of other serai developments within mires. In some cases, it is variation within the herbaceous vegetation that is being invaded that deflects the succession away from the formation of the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland. Where Carex paniculata is a prominent feature of swamp or primary fen, for example, the invasion of shrubs and trees is often early and results instead in the development of swampy Alnus-Carex woodland. Stands of this woodland can be found developing in both floodplain and valley mires, sometimes between the Salix- Betula-Phragmites woodland and open water, sometimes, marking the position of old channels and pools, behind it (e.g. Pallis 1911, Lambert & Jennings 1951). Usually, it is the Alnus-Filipendula sub-community that is found in this kind of zonation but, in the Ant valley, some of the larger stands of the Sphagnum sub-community have a core of Alnus-Carex woodland (Wheeler 1978). In other cases, variation in the pattern of sediment accumulation may lead to the development of other woodland types alongside the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland. Where there is deposition of alluvium, for example, more eutrophic fens and woody vegetation can occur among the sequences of communities on the peat. Such patterns are especially characteristic of some valley mires, where levees build up along the water ’s edge as suspended sediments are dropped in the flood. Then the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland behind gives way to a fringe of such herbaceous vegetation as the Phrag- mites-Urtica fen or the Phalaridetum progressing to wetter kinds of Alnus-Urtica woodland, dominated by Salix purpurea, S. triandra, S. viminalis or 5. fragilis. This kind of transition is a marked feature of the enriched zone alongside the Black Beck in Esthwaite North Fen (Pearsall 1918, Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wil son 1978). Finally, significant differences in the water regime and in the pH, calcium concentration and nutrient status may create conditions which locally prevent the development of tail-herb fen and subsequent Salix-Betula- Phragmites woodland. This seems to happen along the margins of certain of the Broadland flood-plains, where the fens are isolated from the moving waters and in some places influenced by soligenous seepage, and also in some shallow, stagnant peat-cuttings (Wheeler 1978, 1980a, 1983). Here, stretches of the Salix-Betula-Phrag mites woodland give way to small-sedge mires. Similar habitat variation may also play some part in the com plex pattern of vegetation types seen in Esthwaite North Fen (Pearsall 1918, Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wilson 1978) where the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland lies behind a zone of the Potentillo-Caricetum fen which is developing into the Salix-Carex woodland. Interesting as these serai developments are, the for mation of the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland from a range of primary and secondary fens inevitably results in a loss of diversity among the vegetation. With the demise of mowing, extensive stretches of often speciesrich herbaceous vegetation, together with its particular associations of other biota, notably invertebrates (e.g. Ellis 1965), have been lost and the agricultural record, which the pattern of fen compartments, dikes and droves preserved, has been obscured. Only in a very few sites does mowing of fens continue (e.g. Godwin 1978) and attempts to preserve heterogeneity by woodland clearance are laborious and costly. However, where such clearance has been undertaken, at Woodwalton for example (Duffey 1971), the effects have been judged worthwhile. At this particular site, there has been the additional interest of the reappearance, after many years, of Viola persicifolia and the spread of Luzula pallescens in the open vegetation. Distribution "