"w20","Zonation and succession Most commonly, zonations from the Salix-Luzula scrub to other vegetation types are a reflection of variations in grazing pressure though, since these typically relate to differences in topography, edaphic factors sometimes play a part. Usually, the community occurs as small stands iso lated on rocky knolls and ledges within a montane landscape largely transformed by grazing to various kinds of close-cropped grassy or herb-dominated swards. In areas where calcareous rocks and soils are more common, as over the Dalradian schists and limestones of Breadalbane and in the Clova-Caenlochan district, the Salix-Luzula scrub overlaps altitudinally with more high-level stands of the Festuca-Agrostis- Thymus grassland and the Festuca-Agrostis-Alchemilla grass-heath. More flushed types of these two communities show strong floristic affinities with the Salix-Luzula scrub and have probably been derived from it by elimination of willows and tall herbs and a favouring of grasses and grazing-resistant dicotyledons. At higher altitudes, the community can also be found in association with the Festuca-Alchemilla-Silene dwarf-herb community in which grazing-tolerant Arctic-Alpines are well represented and this kind of vegetation, too, may be a derivative of Salix-Luzula scrub, though it is characteristic of more exposed situations where solifluction and cryoturbation are important, so this transition may be partly an edaphic one. Floristically and environmentally, the Dryas-Silene community can be seen as intermediate between the Festuca-Alchemilla-Silene community and the Salix-Luzula scrub. Typically, it is much less heavily grazed than the former, though often in more unstable situations than the latter and it can occasionally have some of the larger Arctic-Alpine willows. Good transitions from the Dryas-Silene community to the Salix-Luzula scrub can be seen on Meall na Samhna, Carn Gorm and Beinn Dearg (Ratcliffe 1977), the willows increasing their cover in the latter vegetation and shading out many species of the former. Where calcareous rocks and soils form a much more local intrusion into landcapes dominated by acidic substrates, as among the Moinian and Lewisian rocks of the Cairngorms and the north-west Highlands, floristic transitions are usually much sharper: here ledges with the Salix-Luzula scrub may be surrounded by a small zone of more calcicolous grassland on flushed soils but often there is a fairly quick zonation to calcifuge grasslands and heaths on base-poor brown earths, gleys and peaty soils. In both these kinds of situations, the community typically occupies only some of the available ledges, others supporting very similar Luzula-Geum vegetation or, where flushing is with somewhat less base-rich waters, the Luzula- Vaccinium community. How far the willows could spread into these other vegetation types or into flushed, calcicolous swards, if grazing were to be reduced, is unknown. Reconstitution of the Salix- Luzula scrub would probably be very difficult, though enclosure of the surrounds of some more vigorous and https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press330 Woodlands and scrub mixed-sex willow populations would be an instructive exercise. On the Durness Limestone above Inchna- damph, Poore & McVean (1957) sampled a low-altitude scrub (210-274 m) where Salix myrsinites seemed to have re-invaded Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland and such expansion might be possible at higher levels. By and large, however, the Salix-Luzula scrub persists now as remnants isolated well above any other kind of woody vegetation. It seems reasonable to suppose, comparing the Scottish situation with Scandinavia, where similar vegetation is widespread, that the community was at one time much more common, replacing scrubby hazel-, rowan- and birch-dominated Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland at high altitudes on wet, calcareous soils. Nowhere, now, do such zonations persist intact. Distribution "