"w21","Zonation and succession Zonations between the Crataegus-Hedera scrub and other vegetation types are very varied but they usually represent stages in diverse successions between open ground or herbaceous vegetation on the one hand and woodland on the other, sometimes progressive, sometimes stabilised, sometimes moving in reverse and often represented by only part of the full sequence of communities. Surprisingly, in view of the very widespread occurrence of these successions, very few systematic studies of their operation have been undertaken. Potentially valuable early studies (e.g. Salisbury 191 Sb, Tansley 1922, Tansley & Adamson 1915, Brenchley & Adam 1915, Ross in Tansley 1939, Hope-Simpson 1940Z), 19416) were, for one reason or another, not followed through in detail and what other knowledge we have usually comes from comparison of different stands at different stages of development (e.g. Watt 1926, 1934a, Scurfield 1959, Merton 1970, Duffey et al. 1974) or more generalised observations (e.g. Thomas 1960, 1963). We are therefore much in need of long-term investigations of the progression of even the most ordinary processes here. Active and direct scrub colonisation of recently- or grossly-disturbed substrates is more common in artificial habitats like urban and industrial wasteland than in naturally unstable situations which are quite rare in the subdued landscape of lowland Britain. On neglected derelict land, the Crataegus-Hedera scrub is usually rep resented by the Hedera-Urtica sub-community springing up among mosaics of weed communities or weedy Arrhenatherion swards, together with Rubus-Holcus underscrub. Patterning is often rather chaotic and pro gression to woodland uncommon, partly because of the frequently recent and continuing disturbance and partly because, in more extensive sites, seed-parents of canopy trees can be quite rare. But Acer pseudoplatanus sometimes becomes very prominent and less isolated sites may have patchy stands of the Holcus lanatus sub community of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, dominated by sycamore with a littlè ash and Q. robur, which have perhaps developed from the scrub. Similar mixtures of weedy vegetation with scrub of the Hedera-Urtica sub-community can characterise abandoned ploughland on less base-rich brown earths. The frequency of this kind of site has varied according to the vagaries of the agricultural economy, fields sometimes falling into neglect when arable cultivation became unprofitable or in periods when incentives for ploughing pushed such cultivation on to marginal land that proved too intractable. Colonisation of such abanhttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press342 Woodlands and scrub doned ground by woody species can follow diverse courses but with generally abundant supplies of seed in hedges and woodlands nearby, it is often more rapid and orthodox than on derelect land and some of the classic descriptions of the development of the Crataegus- Hedera scrub relate to such situations (Salisbury 19186 Brenchley & Adam 1915, Ross in Tansley 1939). As before, it seems likely that the Hedera-Urtica sub community develops into some kind of Quer eus-P ter i- dium-Rubus woodland on more base-poor soils or, where Fagus figures prominently among the invading trees, into the Fagus-Rubus woodland (e.g. Watt 1924, 19346). On more base-rich but heavy soils, very common over the claylands of the Midlands and East Anglia, succession is more likely to lead to the Fraxinus- Acer-Mercurialis woodland with the Mercurialis sub community perhaps supervening between the Hedera- Urtica sub-community and richer forms of this forest; or the latter kind of Crataegus-Hedera scrub may develop directly to the Hedera sub-community of the Fraxinus- Acer-Mercurialis woodland, as seems to have hap pened on Broadbalk Wilderness at Rothamsted (Brenchley & Adam 1915, Tansley 1939) and in the Hayley Triangle (Rackham 1975). Zonations involving the Hedera-Urtica and Mercurialis sub-communities are also common on less and more base-rich brown earths in lowland agricultural landscapes where scrub development has been precipitated by a decline in grazing by stock or wild herbivores, notably rabbits, or by neglect of mowing in field corners or more inaccessible parts of meadows. Usually, in such cases, weedy elements figure little among the associated herbaceous vegetation, grasslands being more prominent. Typically, on these often quite enriched soils, these are mesotrophic swards like the Lolio-Cynosuretum or the Centaureo-Cynosuretum or, more often in direct contact with the scrub, rank Arrhenatheretum or, on moister soils, the Deschampsia-Holcus grassland. Rubus-Holcus underscrub again frequently forms a fringe between the grassland and the scrub. On sea cliffs, where the Crataegus-Hedera scrub can develop in more sheltered situations, these grasslands are replaced by sequences of more maritime swards like the Festuca- Holcus or Festuca-Daucus grasslands or, where there is some grazing, the Festuca-Plantago grassland. In such situations, progressions to woodland are rare, but on neglected inland pastures and meadows the Crataegus- Hedera scrub seems to follow the same sequence as in successions on open ground, to Quer eus- Pter idium- Rubus or Fagus-Rubus woodland on less base-rich soils or to Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland on the more base-rich but moist soils. On base-rich but more free-draining rendzinas, zonations typically involve the Brachypodium or Viburnum sub-communities and on freely-weathering limestone slopes free of heavy grazing, a situation seen especially well on Carboniferous Limestone exposures following myxomatosis, complete sequences from open fern- dominated vegetation, through tussocky Arrhenatherum to these kinds of Crataegus-Hedera scrub and woodland, can be found (e.g. Merton 1970). Usually, on Carboniferous Limestone, most of which lies beyond the natural limit of Fagus, different kinds of Fraxinus- Acer-Mercurialis woodland represent the climax forest, with the Geranium sub-community predominating on steeper screes that have acquired a woodland cover fairly recently (Pigott 1960, 1969, Merton 1970). Longer-established Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland, among which open areas of Viburnum sub community scrub can be found on rocky knolls, is very locally of the Teucrium sub-community (Moss 1913, Pigott 1960, 1969, Shimwell 1968a, 6). On the gentler landscapes of the more southerly limestones like the Chalk and Oolite, zonations between the Brachypodium and Viburnum sub-communities and more open vegetation are often associated with artificially-disturbed sites like spoil heaps and quarry floors (e.g. Tansley 1922, Tansley & Adamson 1925, Hope- Simpson 1940a, 1941a) and rabbit warrens (Tansley 1939). In such places, these kinds of Crataegus-Hedera scrub can be found in mosaics with the calcicolous weedy vegetation of the Atropion alliance of the Epilo- bietea. On more impoverished and disturbed limestone soils, such as are exposed by ploughing and abandonment of very shallow rendzinas, the Viburnum sub community can be seen developing among open swards of the Festuca-Thymus-Hieracium grassland (Lloyd & Pigott 1967). Where scrub develops at a later stage in successions from open ground over limestones or invades long- established grasslands where grazing has been relaxed, the Brachypodium and Viburnum sub-communities are typically found in mosaics with closed Mesobromion swards. What these are depends partly on the regional and local climate, partly on the soil conditions and partly on the grazing regime before scrub invasion. By and large, the distribution of these two kinds of Crataegus-Hedera scrub coincides with the range of the major lowland plagioclimax calcicolous grassland, the Fes tuca-Avenula sward, and different types of this community usually constitute the starting point for successions; towards the north-west, there is a small overlap with Sesleria albicans swards, the Sesleria-Scabiosa and Ses- leria-Galium grasslands; along the oceanic seaboard of the west and south, the Festuca-Carlina grassland can show sporadic progression to scrub, though the edaphic and climatic conditions characteristic of this sward are usually too extreme to support any growth of woody species. Most of the trees and shrubs of the Brachypodium and https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.026 Published online by Cambridge University PressW21 Crataegus monogyna-Hedera helix scrub 343 Viburnum sub-communities can invade (or, if sup pressed saplings are already present, get away in) these grasslands once grazing is relaxed but, quite often, a coincidental spread of ranker grasses means that scrub development is occurring among mosaics of these swards and grasslands dominated by Bromus erectus and/or Brachypodium pinnatum (especially to the south) or B. sylvaticum or, on somewhat deeper soils, Festuca rubra, Avenula pubescens or Arrhenatherum elatius. And, among these latter communities, the advance of scrub may be accompanied by a fringe of Rubus-Holcus underscrub, a feature well seen in Tansley ’s (1922) account of invasion at Downley Bottom on the South Downs. After the demise of rabbits with myxomatosis in the mid- 1950s, mixtures of all these vegetation types have become extremely common, particularly on the southern Chalklands (e.g. Thomas 1960, 1963, Wells 1969, Ratcliffe 1977). Although advanced scrub development in this kind of landscape usually results in a great floristic impoverishment, more open mosaics of short swards, rank grasslands and scrub on limestones represent one of the richest complexes of vegetation types that are found in lowland Britain, with a structural variety that can be of importance to the diversity of invertebrate and bird populations (e.g. Duffey et al. 1974, Smith 1980, Fuller 1982). Post-myxomatosis successions are too young for any extensive progression to mature forest yet to have occurred but, over much of the southern Chalk, the Fagus-Mercurialis woodland is probably the natural climax community on moderately free-draining rendzinas, with the Taxus woodland replacing it locally on slopes with a warmer topoclimate (Watt 1926, 1934a). Beyond the natural limit of beech, such successions probably terminate in the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland with Fraxinus and Acer pseudoplatanus very well represented in younger, secondary canopies. In all these different kinds of succession, scrub advance can be halted by a re-imposition of grazing or mowing which typically results in sharp boundaries between the grassland and scrub quite unlike the gra dual and uneven transitions of active colonisation. Such abrupt zonations are the norm on hedgebanks where linear stands of Crataegus-Hedera scrub, often of planted origin though sometimes the remnants of woodlands adjacent to the path or road, are fronted by mesotrophic or calcicolous grasslands artificially maintained, usually by mowing, with perhaps a very con densed zone of Rubus-Holcus underscrub between. All the sub-communities can be found in such zonations, the particular arrangement of the scrub, underscrub and grassland components varying according to the verge and hedgebank structure, something which often shows marked regional differences along older routes. Similar condensed transitions can be seen where the Crataegus- Hedera scrub occurs as a marginal fringe to mature woodland. Very heavy grazing or cutting or burning of scrub followed by grazing and mowing can reverse successions to the Crataegus-Hedera scrub though it is probably very difficult to restore the richer, more long-established swards from which the serai progressions often start, especially where scrub invasion is well advanced and destruction of the trees and shrubs involves great disturbance. Then, the scrub is likely to be replaced by weedy vegetation or rank Arrhenatherion grasslands. Gradual scrub destruction by long-continued grazing is probably more successful in restoring richer herbaceous communities and some stands of the community may represent an intermediate stage on a retrogressive sere from woodland back to grassland, initiated and maintained by grazing (Moss 1913). Distribution "