"w22","Zonation and succession The Prunus-Rubus scrub is typically found in zonations and mosaics with grasslands, underscrubs and woodlands, sometimes representing active successions on wasteland, in neglected farmland or in coppice plots and clearings, in other cases in more stabilised sequences in exposed situations or along wood margins and rides, by hedges and in field corners. Most often, the associated grasslands are ranker, mesotrophic swards, among which various kinds of Arrhenatheretum figure prominently or, on somewhat moister soils, the Holco-Juncetum or Holcus-Deschamp- sia grassland. The former are very common where the Prunus-Rubus scrub is colonising drier pasture or where it constitutes the core of hedges, where the Hedera- Silene sub-community is typical; the latter occur with the community in ill-drained pastures or where scrub is spreading into rides and clearings within woodlands on heavy and especially trampled soils and here the Viola- Veronica sub-community is more frequent. Less com monly, the Prunus-Rubus scrub occurs among somewhat more calcifugous grasslands and heaths, as where the community is invading neglected commons. Fre quently, the transition from the scrub to the grassland is marked by an untidy fringe of the Rubus-Holcus or Pteridium-Rubus underscrubs. The kinds of woodland most frequently associated with the Prunus-Rubus scrub are the Quercus-Pteridium- Rubus woodland on more base-poor soils and the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis on heavier, more base-rich soils and the community grades floristically to these forest types through their Hedera sub-communities. More locally, towards the south, the Prunus-Rubus scrub can be found with the Fagus-Rubus woodland and, around flushes, it can pass to the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland. Although successions have not been followed, it seems likely that the community can develop into any of these woodland types where saplings of the canopy trees are able to invade and overtop the Prunus'. although forming a dense canopy, Prunus is readily shaded out once trees have begun to emerge. The most usual climax woodlands would seem to be the Quercus- Pteridium-Rubus and Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodlands and stands of the Prunus-Rubus scrub can quickly spring up in stretches of these communities where rides are neglected or areas cleared and left. However, although complete zonations from grasslands, through underscrub and the Prunus-Rubus scrub to woodland can be seen, the community often occurs in broken or abbreviated zonations where succession has been halted for one reason or another. It is common, for example, as a narrow static fringe along woodland rides and around wood margins. Many hedgerow stands have a similar appearance, with a linear stand of the scrub and a much-compressed zone of underscrub and grassland maintained by mowing or grazing. On sea-cliffs with more mesotrophic soils, the Prunus- Rubus scrub often terminates the sequence of vegetation types on the unenclosed cliff top, the Hedera-Silene sub community occurring in more sheltered situations, the Dactylis sub-community in more exposed places, and https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.027 Published online by Cambridge University Press350 Woodlands and scrub giving way below to maritime grassland, usually some type of Festuca-Holcus grassland. Sometimes there is an intervening zone of the Pteridium-Rubus underscrub and, on moister soils, the Festuca-Hyacinthoides grassland beyond this, Prunus and then Rubus and Pteridium petering out as one moves seawards. In other places, these communities can be replaced by the Arrhenatheretum in this transitional zone. Distribution "