"w23","Zonation and succession Most commonly, the Ulex-Rubus scrub occurs as small stands in mosaics with grasslands, heaths, underscrubs and other kinds of scrub on marginal agricultural land. It is also widespread as a fringe to certain kinds of woodland and can occur in hedgerow sequences. The former kinds of pattern are very diverse and often related to complex histories of land use but the range of communities involved is fairly small and distinctive. The grasslands most frequently encountered with the Ulex- rubus scrub, and forming the ground where the community occurs in pasture, are the more mesotrophic forms of the Festuca-Agrostis-Galium grassland and the more calcifugous types of improved swards in the Lolio- Cynosuretum and Centaureo-Cynosuretum. In all these communities, the characteristic herbs of the Ulex-Rubus scrub figure prominently and, in zonations, there is often a strong floristic continuity between the open grassland and the vegetation beneath and among the gorse. In sea cliff sequences, these communities are replaced by their maritime equivalents in the Festuca-Holcus and Festuca- Plantago grasslands. Where grazing is less intense, tran sitions from scrub to grassland may be marked by a zone with bracken, either the Pteridium-Galium community or the Pteridium-Rubus underscrub, invariably of the Teucrium sub-community on these soils. Where there is some diversity in the soils, the Ulex- Rubus scrub can be found colonising alongside other kinds of scrub or with heath. On less base-poor soils, which are sometimes moister than the profiles characteristic here, the community may give way to the Crataegus-Hedera scrub or, commonly on exposed sea-cliffs, to the Prunus-Rubus scrub, where mixtures of U. europaeus and Prunus spinosa can sometimes be found over a rather similar field layer to that typical of this community. Where there is a switch to more acidic and impoverished profiles, the Ulex-Rubus scrub can be found among heaths: on commons, the community often forms a zone around enclosures and settlements and linear strips running along tracks through the heath. The particular heath communities involved vary according to the geographic region: to the south of England, the Calluna-Ulex minor, Ulex minor-Agrostis curtisii or Ulex gallii-Agrostis curtisii heaths usually provide the context, to the west the Calluna-Ulex gallii or Calluna- Erica cinerea heaths, and on the more maritime parts of sea cliffs, the Calluna-Scilla verna heath. U. europaeus continues to be a local dominant in some of these https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.028 Published online by Cambridge University PressW23 Ulex europaeus-Rubus fruticosus scrub 355 communities and there is often a considerable overlap in the associated herbaceous floras of both the heath and the scrub. Both U. europaeus and Cytisus are naturally rather short-lived species (individuals lasting ten years or so) and imposition of grazing or periodic burning may prevent any successional developments beyond the es tablishment of Ulex-Rubus scrub so that, in many cases, there may be a cyclical alternation of the community with grassland or heath, perhaps with a phase of dominance by eutrophic tall herbs where burning and disturbance expose rich soils. In exposed places, too, as on sea cliffs, the Ulex-Rubus scrub may represent an end point in the development of woody vegetation. But where there is shelter from winds and some freedom from grazing and burning, trees can invade more open stands of the community: like juniper, gorse itself may provide some measure of protection from herbivores, saplings growing up inside more leggy bushes or within enclosed enclaves of herbaceous vegetation. The commonest invaders are birch and oak, Betula pendula and Quercus robur predominating but B. pubescens and Q. petraea becoming more frequent to the north and west and Q. petraea locally frequent even in the south-east. Pinus sylvestris is also a prominent coloniser where it is able to seed in from nearby plantations and there can be some Sorbus aucuparia and Ilex aquifolium. Scattered saplings of all these species and locally dense stands of young birch among patches of the Ulex-Rubus scrub with heaths, open grassland areas and tracts of bracken have become a characteristic feature of many lowland commons with the decline in their traditional uses as a source of grazing and mown crops. Successions in such situations as these have never been followed in detail but it seems likely that the usual replacements for the Ulex-Rubus scrub in uninterrupted seres are the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland on more fertile brown earths (perhaps the Holcus sub community with its grassy field layer lacking slow- spreading herbs like Hyacinthoides non-scripta), itself perhaps succeeded within the natural British range of beech by the Fagus-Rubus woodland, and the Quercus- Betula-Deschampsia woodland on somewhat more aci dic and oligotrophic soils. Where this kind of scrub extends into the upland fringes, the oak-birch climax forests may be represented by the north-western Quercus-Betula-Oxalis and Quercus-Betula-Dicranum woodlands. The Ulex-Rubus scrub is also found in close spatial association with woodlands, generally the Quercus- Pteridium-Rubus woodland, where underwood or canopy has been cut and, in the absence of cleaning or careful attention to planted saplings, it may herald a run-down of the woodland. The community also occurs widely as a more or less permanent fringe to this kind of woodland, kept in check by intensive use of the neighbouring land. Distribution "