"w24","Zonation and succession The Rubus-Holcus underscrub is found in mosaics and zonations with a wide variety of herbaceous communities but a relatively small number of scrubs and woodland types. Often, these patterns are a clear expression of serai sequences in various stages of active development but many are incomplete or, very commonly, stabilised, either by their coming to a natural halt or by being subject to some form of treatment along their margins. In areas of more open ground, the community, usually represented by the Cirsium sub-community, typically occurs with weedy vegetation in which Chenopodium spp., Artemisia vulgaris, Rumices, Epilobium angustifolium, Urtica dioica or, along pathways, trampling-resistant plants like Plantago major and Poa annua, occur: mosaics of communities dominated by such species, with patchy Rubus-Holcus underscrub among them, are very characteristic of derelict land. Continuing disturbance (often including burning) and the shortage of seed-parents often limits colonisation by https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.029 Published online by Cambridge University Press360 Woodlands and scrub shrubs and trees but zonations sometimes continue to Crataegus-Hedera scrub and even to woodland, usually some form of Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland. Less frequently, the Cirsium sub-community can be found among various kinds of heath on disturbed commons, though here it usually marks out small enclaves of more enriched soils among stretches of Ulex-Rubus scrub. The usual context for the Arrhenatherum-Heracleum Crataegus-Hedera scrub Rubus-Holcus underscrub Arrhenatherum grassland Lolium-Cynosurus grasslandFigure 25. Patterns of grassland, underscrub and scrub in neglected pasture and on managed verge. W21 W24 MG1 MG6sub-community is an agricultural landscape where this type of Rubus-Holcus underscrub generally forms a part of patterns involving pastures like the Lolio-Cynosure- tum, grazed and mown grasslands like the Centaureo- Cynosuretum or periodically-cut swards like the Arrhe- natheretum. Transitions through to scrub and woodland are more common here where neglect has been of long standing, and usually involve the Crataegus-Hedera or Prunus-Rubus scrubs and the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland or its beech analogue, the Fagus-Rubus woodland. On somewhat more base-rich brown earths, the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland may figure. The Arrhenatherum-Heracleum sub-community is also very widespread in zonations around wood margins and along hedgebanks, where sequences of these grassland, https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.029 Published online by Cambridge University PressW24 Rubus fruticosus-Holcus lanatus underscrub 361 In such situations and in more extensive stands where dense growth of the brambles may hinder invasion by shrubs or trees, the Rubus-Holcus underscrub can attain some degree of stability. Often, however, taller woody species invade with the Rubus and overtake it in a progression to scrub and woodland. In most cases, the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland appears to be the natural climax on the kinds of soils typical of the Rubus- Holcus underscrub or, more locally, the Fagus-Rubus woodland. In both of these communities, brambles play an important role in the field layer and, in younger stands of the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, Hol cus lanatus and various of the other mesophytic or weedy species important here, continue to be well represented. It is in this kind of woodland, too, that the Rubus-Holcus underscrub shows its most prominent resurgence after coppicing or clear-felling and dense stands of the community may hinder regrowth of stools or establishment of any new planted saplings. Distribution "