"w25","Zonation and succession The Pteridium-Rubus underscrub is commonly found in close association with woodlands or other replacements for them within predominantly agricultural or heath landscapes. Sometimes, the derivation from woodland is clear, as where the community occupies rides and clearings, extensive glades in wood-pasture, old coppice compartments or clear-felled sites; in other cases, the historical connection with long-lost woodland is more tenuous. In general, though, this is a vegetation type of regressive seres and the overwhelming dominance of bracken itself, together with the effects of grazing and burning, may prevent re-establishment of woodland. The community shows a close floristic relationship to the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, the main Car pinion forest of base-poor brown earths in the British lowlands, and, where it occurs within or adjacent to woodland, it is almost always of this type, the underscrub running from glades and rides under the tree and shrub canopy with very little change apart from some attenuation of the bracken and bramble cover. The Hyacinthoides sub-community is very similar to the field layer of the Typical sub-community of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, the Teucrium sub community to the Holcus lanatus sub-community of the woodland, a common forest type of plantations; and, in the woodland context, the particular kinds of vegetation involved may be largely a reflection of treatment. Where the woodland has totally disappeared, stands of the community can remain isolated, marking out the original site and sharply delimited from the surrounding landscape of improved agricultural grasslands or arable. In less intensive landscapes, the Pteridium-Rubus underscrub can persist as a field-border community and then it may form part of a fairly ordered sequence from grasslands through to remnants of woodland or scrub. Par ticularly striking zonations of this kind can be seen on the sea-cliffs of western Britain where the Pteridium- Rubus underscrub occurs interposed between maritime grasslands and scrub (Malloch 1970, 1971). In these situations, the different edaphic preferences of the two sub-communities are well seen, the Hyacinthoides type being found between Festuca-Hyacinthoides grassland and the Prunus-Rubus scrub on moister, mesotrophic soils, the Teucrium type occurring with the Festuca- Holcus grassland and the Ulex-Rubus scrub on more acidic profiles. In more degraded heath landscapes, the Pteridium- Rubus underscrub is represented by the Teucrium sub community which usually accounts for but a small proportion of the bracken-dominated vegetation, most of it clearly belonging to the more calcifugous Pteri- dium-Galium community. Vegetation patterns in such situations are usually complex mosaics but small stands of the Ulex-Rubus scrub can often be found with the Teucrium sub-community forming a patchwork over the less-impoverished soils. Although natural senescence of bracken may permit re-invasion of woody species, healthy Pteridium-Rubus underscrub is probably very resistant to progression back to climax forest. Birch or, on moister and more fertile soils, ash and sycamore are possible invaders here but none is well equipped to grow on thick bracken litter or in denser shade. Quercus robur can fare better, though it too may suffer under thicker bracken covers (Jones 1959). The proportion of surviving bramble in the underscrub may be important here, since it casts lighter shade and helps maintain the mull humus regime on which most of the eventual forest dominants can thrive, hindering the run-down to more impoverished conditions. Although less widespread than the Pteridium-Galium community, the persistence of the Pteridium-Rubus underscrub bears similar testi mony to the long history of woodland clearance, grazing and improvement in the southern lowlands of Britain. Distribution "