"w3","Zonation and succession At some sites, the Salix-Carex woodland occupies a clear position in open-water transitions running from the woodland on the driest peats through fen and swamp to aquatic vegetation. At Crag Lough, for example, the community has a fringing front of very wet Potentillo- Caricetum fen which gives way, in turn, to the Caricetum rostratae, the Equisetetum fluviatile or related societies of Potentilla palustris and Menyanthes trifoliata (Lock & Rodwell 1981). A similar pattern is found in Esthwaite North Fen, though here, the Phragmitetum and Scirpe- tum lacustris also play a part in the swamp sequence (Pearsall 1918, Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wilson 1978). In more fully terrestrialised basin mires, the community characteristically occurs in complex patchworks of vegetation that involve a variety of rich and poor fens related to local variations in seepage and through-put of waters of different pH and calcium content. Again, the Potentillo-Caricetum can play a part in such mosaics but, more often, it is some kind of Carex rostrata- Calliergon mire that provides the bulk of the herbaceous vegetation around the Salix-Carex woodland with a more local development of poor fens like the Carex rostrata-Sphagnum squarrosum community. If there is some deposition of alluvium alongside inflow streams, Filipendulion communities may complicate the pattern. This kind of mosaic is seen very clearly at Malham Tarn (Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975; Figure 17). At this site and in some other basin mires, the Salix- Carex woodland can also be found forming a marginal belt around areas of Sp/ztzgwww-dominated mires with patchy Betula-Molinia woodland. Such situations ap proach those found in raised mires where, likewise, the community can occur in the lagg giving way sharply towards the mire centre to acidophilous bog and woodland (e.g. Rankin 1911/)). The small amount of stratigraphical data available from mires such as these (Lock & Rodwell 1981, Webb & Moore 1982) suggests that the Salix-Carex woodland has developed from fens such as the Potentillo-Caricetum and the Carex-Calliergon mire though the exact relationship of such successions to natural changes in the habitat has not been monitored. Nor do we know how rapidly such developments proceed under normal circumstances, though photographic evidence from https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press68 Woodlands and scrub Figure 17. Simple and complex mosaics in mires with Salix-Carex woodland. Salix-Carex woodland Carex-Potentilla & related fens Carex rostrata & Equisetum fluviatile swampsW4 Betula-Molinia woodland M19 Calluna-Eriophorum & M25 Molinia-Potentilla mires M27 F ilipendula-Angelica mire https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.008 Published online by Cambridge University PressW3 Salix pentandra-Carex rostrata woodland 69 Crag Lough (Lock & Rodwell 1981) suggests that a good cover of this woodland had formed there within a century or so. At Esthwaite, too, colonisation has been quite rapid since the early surveys (Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wilson 1978). But both these sites have moderately eutrophic waters and, in more impoverished basins, change may be much slower. The eventual fate of such successions is unknown but it seems unlikely that the Salix-Carex woodland progresses to, say, Alnus-Urtica woodland except where stands are drained and dis turbed. It is possible, too, that sinking of the fen mat under the weight of the developing canopy sets back further succession in some cases. One other possibility is that the community is a prelude to the development of more ombrotrophic vegetation as terrestrialisation isolates the mire surface from the ground-water. In this respect, the occasional occurrence of patches of Sphagna within the field layer of the Salix-Carex woodland is of interest. Further sampling may permit the characterisation of a distinct sub-community of this woodland in which Sphagna are more prominent, with a decreased representation of some of the dicotyledons and certain Carices, as in the southern Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland. The pro gression of such vegetation to herbaceous bog (perhaps with an intervening stage with the Betula-Molinia woodland) would then leave the Salix-Carex woodland per sisting only on the marginal fen peat (Walker 1970, Proctor 1974, Wheeler 1983). As on southern flood plain mires, the conditions for such a development might well be initiated within the herbaceous fen before any shrub invasion had taken place. Distribution "