"w4","Zonation and succession Very often, the Betula-Molinia woodland occurs in zonations and mosaics with other vegetation types which reflect the progress of birch invasion on mire surfaces. On ombrogenous and topogenous mires, it is typically found in association with Erico-Sphagnion and Ericion tetralicis bogs and wet heaths and fragments of such vegetation types persisting within the field layer of the Sphagnum sub-community can give some clue as to its origin. On raised mires and in basin mires where the waters are not base-rich and calcareous, this kind of Betula-Molinia woodland may represent a fairly natural first development in the progression to woodland with increased elevation of the peats above the ground water level and, in some places, crudely concentric zonations can be seen which approximate to the classic hydroserai pattern as in some Shropshire meres (Sinker 1962) and at Malham Tarn (e.g. Proctor 1974). At certain sites, as at Malham again, the zonation continues to the drier Dry opter is-Rubus sub-community which may represent the continuation of a succession towards acid oak-birch woodlands. Very often, however, patterns are not so clear as this and fragments of these two sub-communities frequently occur intermixed with variously modified remnants of mire vegetation on peat surfaces that have been subject to complex histories of draining, burning and cutting (as at Woodwalton: Poore 19566). Similar treatments may also have encouraged the development of the Betula-Molinia woodland where it occurs on the margins of run-down blanket mires. Other kinds of complexities arise where there has been woodland development over mire surfaces with varying https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.009 Published online by Cambridge University PressW4 Betula pubescens-Molinia caerulea woodland 75 water and nutrient regimes. In flood-plain mires, for example, the Betula-Molinia woodland can mark out ombrogenous nuclei which have formed within tail-herb or Carex-dominated fens. In the Ant valley, the Sphagnum sub-community forms a core to some of the striking islands of Betula-Salix-Phragmites woodland that have grown up among the Peucedano-Phragmitetum fen (Wheeler 1978, 1980c) and, at Esthwaite, it has developed behind a front of Potentillo-Caricetum fen which is progressing to the Salix-Carex woodland (Pearsall 1918, Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wilson 1978). Similar, though more complex, patterns occur around peat islands in the Malham fens (Proctor 1974, Adam et al. 1975). The Juncus sub-community can also be found in association with mire communities. In the rands of basin mires, for example, it often occurs amongst rush-or sedge-dominated vegetation of the Caricion curto- nigrae or Junco-Molinion and these would seem to be the normal serai precursors to this kind of woodland in such situations. In valley mires, and in soligenous soakways on some ombrogenous mires, it can be found in mosaics with Ericion tetralicis vegetation and may develop from this by birch invasion. Where this kind of Betula-Molinia woodland marks out slope flushes with peaty mineral soils, rather different patterns are encountered. Usually here, the Juncus sub-community occurs as small stands within more extensive tracts of drier woodland, very often at junctions between acid oak birch woodlands on permeable sandstones above the flush line, and less acidophilous Carpinion woodland on the shales or drift below.Distribution "