"w5","Zonation and succession Around standing and slow-moving open waters, the Lysimachia and Phragmites sub-communities are often found in zonations running from woodland, through swamp, to aquatic vegetation, as around some of the Norfolk Broads (e.g. Pallis 1911, Lambert & Jennings 1951, Lambert 1951) and at Sweat Mere (Clapham in Tansley 1939, Sinker 1962). Most frequently, it is Carex paniculata swamp that forms an immediate front to the Alnus-Carex woodland but sometimes invasion of the developing sedge tussocks is so rapid that there is no distinct sedge swamp but simply a belt of helophyte swamp dominated by Phragmites australis or Typha angustifolia between the young woodland fringe and the open water. Where invasion has been substantially delayed, a belt of sedge-dominated fen (the Peucedano- Phragmitetum or Phragmites-Eupatorium fen) may supervene between the woodland and the swamp. On drier ground, the Lysimachia and Phragmites sub-communities can pass to drier carr of the Salix-Betula- Phragmites woodland, still over peat, or directly to some kind of mixed deciduous woodland, usually in these southern lowlands, the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland. However, in the latter case, quite gradual transitions in both woody species and field layer may, in fact, mask discontinuities in substrate and soils, as where mire deposits give way to solid valley sides around. On more extensive flood-plain mires with a long history of exploitation, various kinds of human disturbance can complicate this basic pattern. Peat-digging, for example, can create new hollows which, when abandoned and flooded and colonised with swamp and swamp-woodland, produce local reversals in the general trend (well seen in some of the profiles of Lambert & Jennings 1951). Then, mowing for fen-crops can create extensive stretches of secondary herbaceous vegetation behind the Alnus-Carex woodland, though in most places such mowing-marshes have been abandoned now and colonised by the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland or, where there has been much disturbance and enrichment of the dry peat surface, the Alnus-Urtica woodland. Along the water ’s edge, too, zonations have been modified, as where boat-traffic and the depredations of coypu have fretted away the fringe of swamp and left rather moribund stands of Alnus-Carex woodhttps://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.010 Published online by Cambridge University PressW5 Alnus glutinosa-Carex paniculata woodland 85 land abutting directly on to open water. Eutrophication of open waters has also encouraged the development of Phragmites-Urtica fen along the front of some tracts. There is a continuous series of zonations between the more extensive sequences of vegetation types described above and the much narrower belts of communities found on the peaty terraces of small slow-moving rivers. Here, the Alnus-Carex woodland (usually, in these sites, the Phragmites sub-community) can be found occupying the flat and winter-flooded ground of the terrace with fragmentary swamp along the water ’s edge and a very sharp transition at the valley side to mixed deciduous woodland. Quite commonly, the swamp-woodland is separated from the moving river waters by a narrow belt of the Alnus-Urtica woodland on levees of rich alluvium, behind which conditions may be virtually stagnant. These kinds of patterns now often survive isolated in intensive agricultural or afforested landscapes where the valley sides have been cleared for pasture or a tree crop. In valley mires where there is some persisting influence of more base-rich and eutrophic waters along the central axis, the Lysimachia or Phragmites sub communities can occur as a central strip of woodland sandwiched between parallel belts of very wet poor-fen with Sphagna (especially S. recurvum) and dominants such as Carex rostrata, Equisetum fluviatile and Juncus acutiflorus or Junco-Molinion vegetation, which in turn passes to Sphagnum pools and then to wet and dry heath. This is the classic kind of zonation described from some valley mires in the New Forest (Rankin 191 lô, Rose 1950, McVean 1956Ô, Wheeler 1983). Similar, though often compressed and fragmented, patterns can be seen around the margins of some basin mires where there is a local influence of more base-rich soligenous waters in the lagg (as at Rhos-goch Common: Bartley 1960). The characteristic association of the Chrysosplenium sub-community with seepage zones means that it is often found as small stands isolated within stretches of drier, usually mixed deciduous woodland. In such situations, it can be seen as the less base-rich analogue of the Alnus- Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland: like that vegetation it usually interrupts stretches of bluebell or mercury woodland or straddles transitions between the two over junctions of less and more base-rich soils. Where see page is sufficient to create the semblance of a small valley mire, it may form more extensive sinuous stands following the line of water movement. Stratigraphical studies in Broadland (Jennings & Lambert 1951, Lambert & Jennings 1951, Lambert 1951, 1965) have shown that the more intact zonations from open water to Alnus-Carex woodland represent a primary hydrosere in which aquatic vegetation, then Typha, Phragmites and Carex swamps are naturally succeeded by invasion of woody species. More fragmen tary studies at Sweat Mere in Shropshire (e.g. Sinker 1962) suggest that a similar process has occurred there. Although both sedge-swamp and swamp-carr were poorly represented in the numerous profiles examined in Walker ’s (1970) survey, it seems likely that this succession is the normal one around more base-rich and eutrophic open waters in the British lowlands (Wheeler 1978, 1980c, 1983). Despite the primeval appearance of many stands of this woodland, it is clear that it can develop from open water within little more than a century (Lambert 1951, 1965, Sinker 1962). Some stands, though, may be considerably older because this appears to be a fairly stable kind of vegetation and there is no firm evidence that it habitually progresses to drier carr, say of the Salix-Betula-Phragmites type. This may happen in some more isolated parts of flood-plain mires or in those valley mires where there is substantial deposition of alluvium but often the woodland becomes moribund before the general peat surface has become markedly dry, trees collapsing and sedge tussocks decaying to initiate the cycle of development over again (e.g. McVean 1956&). In some situations, marked enrichment of the waters and substrates (say, through sewage or fertiliser contamination or massive deposition of mineral material), may precipitate a succession to wetter kinds of the Alnus-Urtica woodland. Although some drier stands of the community may have been cleared in the past for the extension of mowing-marshes (e.g. Lambert 1965), the frequently intractable topography of the Alnus-Carex woodland has given it some protection against conversion to secondary fen. However, where clearance has occurred, the community is not able to re-develop on the abandonment of mowing unless there is substantial inundation by base-rich and moderately eutrophic waters, in marked contrast to the Salix-Betula-Phragmites woodland which is very often found as a secondary woodland over old mowing-marsh. Where cattle have access to drier stands, they can graze down the tall herbs and physically damage the sedge tussocks which can lead to a gradual run-down of this woodland type. Light burning of stands among heathland in the New Forest does not totally destroy Alnus which can produce abundant basal sprouts (McVean 19566). Where the local influence of base-rich waters is ulti mately insufficient to offset the development of more acid peat, as in some valley mires and basin mires, the Alnus-Carex woodland may give way eventually to Sp/zagHww-dominated mire. Such a development was suggested by Rose (1950) for some New Forest valley mires and it may be happening, too, around the ombrogenous nuclei found in some Broadland fens (as in the Ant valley: Wheeler 1978, 1983). Walker (1970) con sidered that Sphagnum-mm might be a natural climax https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press86 Woodlands and scrub of swamp-carr in small inland basins in the British lowlands. Distribution "