"w6","Zonation and succession The Alnus-Urtica woodland is now rarely found as part of extensive zonations on alluvial soils because so many flood-plains have been extensively reclaimed for agriculture. Most often, the Salix fragilis and Typical sub https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press96 Woodlands and scrub communities survive as small, isolated stands within active loops of slack lowland rivers or around abandoned but still wet pools. They sometimes pass directly to open water or are fringed by a belt of eutrophic herbaceous vegetation, such as the Phragmites-Urtica fen, or Phalaris fen over silt, or by a zone of inundation vegetation over less stable alluvium or river shingle. Landward boundaries are often abrupt, with a sharp transition to improved pasture or arable but more neglected fringes may have a belt of Urtica or Epilobium hirsutum or rank Arrhenatheretunr, in other cases, a boundary ditch occurs with swamp vegetation. In nar rower valleys, where small alluvial terraces abut directly on to surrounding slopes, stands of the Salix fragilis or Typical sub-communities can pass sharply to some kind of mixed deciduous woodland. Where slope-flushes run down on to the flats, the Alnus-Fraxinus-Ly simachia woodland may form a transitional zone between. On older drier terraces in this kind of situation, the Sambucus or Betula sub-communities occur on the stabilised alluvium, and there seems little doubt that these kinds of Alnus-Urtica woodland are a natural serai development from the wetter sub-communities on gradually accumulating mineral material. The succession might be expected to progress to Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland with the gradual invasion of Quercus spp., Pteridium aquilinum and herbs like Anemone nemorosa and Ranunculus ficaria. In valley mires and flood-plain mires, the wetter kinds of Alnus-Urtica woodland are sometimes found in zonations close to open water with stands of Salix-Betula- Phragmites or Alnus-Carex woodlands or the Salix- Carex woodland, but typically they mark areas of alluvial deposition behind which peat is accumulating, rather than forming an integral part of a single hydrarch succession. This is well seen alongside the Black Beck in Esthwaite North Fen (Pearsall 1918, Tansley 1939, Pigott & Wilson 1978). More usually on extensive peats, the Alnus-Urtica woodland occurs more deeply within the fen system forming complexes with other woodlands and herbaceous communities and here it seems to represent a secondary development attendant upon late eutrophication of the habitat. This may happen naturally where deep fen peats dry out superficially and become oxidised with a release of nutrients, but in many cases it has probably been assisted by draining, the surface disturbance of peat-digging and inwash of fertiliser run-off: complex histories of this kind seem to lie behind the development of the community in sites like Woodwalton (Poore 1956&), Reserve A at Wicken (Godwin et al. 1974) and Askham Bog (Fitter et al. 1980). In such situations, the usual precursor of the Alnus-Urtica woodland seems to be the Salix-Betula- Phragmites woodland which may progress fairly rapidly to the Typical or Sambucus sub-communities and then perhaps the Betula sub-community. In less base-rich situations, as in some basin mires, the Betula sub community may develop more directly from the Betula- Molinia woodland on grossly-disturbed acid peats. Distribution "