"w7","Zonation and succession Typically, this community occurs as fairly small stands within more extensive stretches of other kinds of woodland, marking out sites where a strong influence of ground water interrupts vegetation patterns determined in large measure by variations in the base-richness of the soils. The most frequent context for the Carex-Cirsium sub community is some kind of less calcifugous oak-birch woodland clothing the surrounding slopes of arenaceous or argillaceous bedrocks or fairly light-textured drift with more freely draining brown earths. Where the interruption of drainage of the ground water is very slight or localised, as where thin shaley partings occur within sandstone sequences or where superficials become more clayey, the flush woodland may form no more than a small (though often repeated) variation in a more or less uniform woodland cover. In other cases, the patterning is more pronounced, as where there are more vigorous flushes or where very young river valleys have cut through shales, where the concave slope above the outer swing of every meander can have an undercut, slumping flush occupied by the Carex-Cirsium sub community, alternating with drier oak-birch woodland on the intervening bluffs. Some very good examples of this last kind of pattern can be seen in the Carboniferous sediments of the Pennines and in Northumberland. The particular kind of oak-birch woodland involved in such zonations depends on the regional locality of the flush. Over much of the range of the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland, it is the north-western Quercus-Betula- Oxalis woodland, as in the Lake District, the northern Pennines and Scotland. Further south, it is the Quercus- Pteridium-Rubus woodland, often in the southern Pen- nines and Wales the Acer-0xalis sub-community, in the occasional Wealden localities the Anemone or Typical sub-communities (Figure 18). A quite frequent complication of this general pattern is produced where the impervious substrate giving rise to the flushing is more calcareous than the pervious deposit above. Then, the Carex-Cirsium sub-community can straddle the junction between two kinds of woodland, the flush biting back into the more calcifugous vege tation above and spilling down on to the more calcicolous cover below. This is very well seen in those Wealden woods where flushing occurs at the junction of the Hythe Beds above, carrying Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland and the Atherfield Clay and Weald Clay below, with Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland. A similar zonation occurs further north where more calcareous shales interrupt sequences of less calcareous grits, though where there is flushing with markedly base rich waters in the north-west, the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysi- machia woodland is generally replaced by wetter kinds of Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland. In all these situations, the Deschampsia sub-community can be found in association with the Carex-Cirsium sub-community as a transition to the woodland on drier soils around. However, it frequently occurs without the Carex-Cirsium sub-community, marking out strongly- gleyed patches with the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus and Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodlands on less well drained gentle slopes and plateaus or where there is a switch to more heavy-textured drift. It can also spread along rides and paths within these woodlands where trampling consolidates heavy-textured soils. To the north-west, transitions between the Deschampsia sub-community and the surrounding woodland, which are already often very gentle, can be further blurred by grazing throughout. The Urtica sub-community is often found in the same kinds of woodlands as the two other sub-communities and, where flush waters drain down through colluvium and on to stream-side flats, it can occur in close association within them, all three forming a complex suite. In other cases, it occurs alone on alluvium, passing more sharply to the woodland on the drier valley sides. Where there is some variation in canopy cover, a frequent natural feature in less stable stands of the Carex-Cirsium sub-community, but also found where timber has been cleared, the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland can form mosaics with Filipendulion tail herb vegetation. Where the Urtica sub-community is opened up with some disturbance, patches of nitrophi- lous tail-herb vegetation are often found and clearance of the Deschampsia sub-community can result in a spread of Rubus-Holcus underscrub and the Deschamp- sia-Holcus grassland. Where clearance has been more extensive, the site of the woodland may be marked only by a small patch of flushed herbaceous vegetation in a stretch of improved grassland. In general terms, it is probably some kind of Filipendulion vegetation which forms the natural precursor to https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.012 Published online by Cambridge University PressW7 Alnus glutinosa-Fraxinus excelsior-Lysimachia nemorum woodland 107 Figure 18. Different topographies and vegetation patterns with Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland. W4b Betula-Molinia woodland, Juncus sub-community W4c Betula-Molinia woodland, Sphagnum sub-community W7a Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland, Urtica sub-communityW7b Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland, C Cirsium sub-community W7c Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland, Deschampsia sub-community W10 Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland Wil Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland W16 Quercus-Betula-Deschampsia woodland W17 Quer eus-Be tula-Dicranum woodland (a) Valley cut through shales in the upland fringes of north-west Britain with well- drained brows and slumping undercut hollows (c) Grit/shale junction in western Britain with slope flush and acidic peat on terrace below(Z?) Sandstone/clay junction in south-east England with slope flush and eutrophic alluvium on flooded river terrace below https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press108 Woodlands and scrub the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimaçhia woodland, though succession has never been followed in detail. With continued flushing and gleying, the community can probably persist as a more or less permanent feature but, with increased drying of the soil, as, for example, on up building alluvium beneath the Urtica sub-community, progression to the Quer cus-Pteridium-Rubus or Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland might be expected, with a decline in nitrophilous herbs and Alnus, a spread of Rubus and an invasion of oak, Hyacinthoides and Pteridium. Distribution "