"w8","Zonation and succession Most commonly, zonations between different kinds of Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland and from this community to other woodland types are under the primary influence of soil variation. Treatment differences can accentuate or confuse such patterns and also produce direct effects of their own. Agricultural improvement has often truncated zonations and created a wide variety of artificially sharp transitions to herbaceous vegetation. Over wooded tracts of suitably base-rich soils, the most widespread zonations between different sub-communities here are related to variations in soil moisture. On the heavy, impermeable clays which form the typical substrate for the community in much of the south and east, such variations are often directly dependent on the extent of surface-water gleying, itself a function of slope. Slope differences are often very slight over the clay superficial characteristic of many stands of Fraxinus- Acer-Mercurialis woodland in East Anglia and the east Midlands, but quite sufficient to induce a shift from the Primula-Glechoma sub-community to the Anemone sub community wherever there are flatter plateaus on which water becomes perched or shallow hollows into which it runs. As in the patterns described above from Hayley Wood, there is often a superimposed zonation of dominance within these sub-communities, as the major spe cies succumb in turn to the increased waterlogging (Abeywickrama 1949, Martin 1968, Martin & Pigott 1975, Rackham 1975). Quite frequently, too, the zonation continues to the Deschampsia sub-community on even more waterlogged soils. This kind of woodland can be found in wet hollows within stands of the Anemone sub-community but it also often forms a transition around flushes and springs to some type of alder woodland. Flushes in this kind of situation often carry the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland but, where there is pronounced ground-water gleying and some accumulation of fen peat below spring-heads, the Alnus-Carex woodland can terminate the sequence. Repeated pat terns of this kind are very characteristic of the more calcareous strata of the Wealden and Atherfield Clays in Surrey and Kent, where series of springs emerge at the base of the overlying Lower Greensand. Where streams with some alluvial deposition flow through Fraxinus- Acer-Mercurialis woodlands, the Deschampsia sub community can give way to the more eutrophic Alnus- Urtica woodland on the flats. Flush-surround and stream-side zonations of this type are also quite frequent to the north and west, where Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodlands can sometimes be found on more calcareous shales of the Carboniferous and Oolite sequences or over superficials. Typically, though, the substrates of the community in this region are more free-draining limestones and the Primula- Glechoma sub-community is absent. More usually, here, there is a rather sharp transition from any stands of the Anemone or Deschampsia sub-communities to the Geranium sub-community on rendzina soils over steeply- sloping surrounding ground. On this more rugged topography of the north and west, however, aspect can confuse this basic pattern because, on cooler and wetter north-facing slopes, the Anemone and Deschampsia sub communities can sometimes extend on to quite steep ground, forming patches within tracts of the Geranium sub-community (or the rarer Teucrium sub-community) over pockets of moister soil. Such patterns are well seen in some of the Derbyshire Dales and in the Mendips, where opposite faces of the valleys and gorges can present a sharp contrast in the extent of the different sub-communities. Finally, on the steeper slopes in this region, downwash is often important and a very typical pattern here is for the Geranium sub-community to give way to the Allium sub-community wherever there is an accumulation of deep, moist and free-draining colluvium. Although all kinds of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland are characteristic of more base-rich soils, individual woodland sites in which the community is represented often span geological transitions to less calcareous rocks or superficials. Then, zonations to less calcicolous woodland can be found, usually to the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, which is the counterpart of this community throughout its range on brown earth soils of moderate to low base-status. Where there are sharp bedrock differences, as where limestones or calcareous shales or clays are interbedded with arenaceous deposits, a common feature of the Carboniferous, Jurassic and Cretaceous sequences, the corresponding vegetational boundaries can be quite clear. However, it is important to remember that some of the leading species in the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland continue to be prominent in the Quercus-Pteridium- Rubus woodland and can therefore run across such junctions with no change in their abundance. Among the woody species, for example, Quercus robur, Carpinus betulus, Tilia cordata, Corylus and Crataegus monogyna https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressW8 Fraxinus excelsior-Acer campestre-Mercurialis perennis woodland 143 and, in the north-west, Acer pseudoplatanus, can all occur commonly in both communities; and, among the field-layer plants, Hyacinthoides, Rubus fruticosus agg. and, on moister soils, Anemone and Ranunculus ficaria can likewise be found in both. Usually, however, these transitions from one community to the other are marked by an obvious fading in the prominence of Fraxinus, Acer campestre (and, in the north-west, Ulmus glabra), Mercurialis, Geum urbanum, Circaea lutetiana, Arum maculatum and Viola reichenbachiana and by an increase, at least where the soils are not waterlogged, in Pteridium. In the south-east, the transitions commonly involve a switch from the Primula-Glechoma, Anemone or Hedera sub-communities of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland to the Typical, Anemone or Hedera sub-communities of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland respectively, depending on such factors as the amount of soil moisture and light. To the north-west, analogous transitions are usually from the Geranium sub-community of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland to the Holcus mollis sub-community of the Quer eus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland. Over superficial deposits where there can be very diffuse or disorderly variations in calcium carbonate content and base-status, transitions may be much harder to discern or understand. Sometimes, sandier patches are marked by obvious islands of the Quercus- Pteridium-Rubus woodland within tracts of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland, as at Gamlingay in Cambridgeshire (Adamson 1912) and many other East Anglian woods (Rackham 1980). In other cases, there may be no more than the haziest impression that one kind of woodland is trying to ‘break through ’ the other with scattered Mercurialis and Pteridium intermixed over soils of intermediate quality. There are situations, too, where variations in the base status of the soils within woodlands are related, not to geological differences, but to flushing with calcium-rich waters. Where streams flow through stands of the Quercus-Pteridium-Rubus woodland, for example, the better drained of the alluvial flats often carry fragments of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland, sometimes little more than small patches of Mercurialis inside every loop of the stream with an occasional scattered Fraxinus. These were a marked feature of the Carpinus-dorninated woodlands described from Hertfordshire by Salisbury (1916, 1918«) but the phenomenon is very widespread. Very commonly, and especially in the south-east, these kinds of soil-related zonations within stands of the community and to other types of woodland are overlain by treatment-derived patterns of variation. Sometimes, treatments have reinforced elements of natural zonations by selecting for trees or shrubs favouring particular soil conditions and accentuating their association with a certain field layer (as with Carpinus in the Anemone sub-community). Usually, however, treatments have been applied with no reference to the disposition of soils of different moisture content or base status, so that coppice compartments or patterns der ived from timber extraction or replanting are superimposed independently over the natural transitions. This means that woods often show fairly clear soil-related variations within the field layer and equally clear but artificial and quite differently-disposed differences in the cover of underwood and timber. As described above, different styles of treatment can affect the field-layer composition and physiognomy in the various sub-communities in different ways, but much of this variation can be seen as temporary (often cyclical) disruptions which do not, in the long term, modify the soil-related patterns. By and large, then, zonations persist while treatment-derived mosaics come and go within their components and across their boundaries. But there are some exceptions to this general rule. First, where trampling and increased light are combined, as they are when tracts are coppiced or clear-felled and allowed to regenerate (or planted with the usual hardwoods of the community), the parcel or compartment is often clearly marked out by a stretch of the Deschampsia sub-community which interrupts the natural zonation. Where short-cycle rotations are maintained on soils approaching the wet state of those normally occupied by this vegetation, the stand may persist. And, where trampling and high light levels are maintained permanently along paths and rides, there can be similar sudden switches to the Deschampsia sub-community, winding in narrow strips through the wood or marking out regular compartments in a grid. Second, there can be abrupt transitions to the rather species-poor and gloomy vegetation of the Hedera sub community at the boundaries of tracts where regrowth has been left unhindered for more than 20-50 years or so as in long-neglected coppice parcels or in planted com partments at the pole stage. Often, too, newer additions to older woods, originating from planting or by spontaneous invasion, show a sharp switch to the Hedera sub community at the original boundary, or a little way beyond it if there has been time for invasion of the more slow-spreading herbs (as in the Hayley Triangle: Rackham 1975). Third, at those few localities to the north and west where the Teucrium sub-community survives, the boundaries between it and the more widespread Geranium sub-community seem to mark a treatment-related dis tinction between older woodland that has escaped gross interference and younger woodland derived by a mix ture of planting and natural regeneration on open ground over the past few centuries (Pigott 1960, 1969, Merton 1970). As noted earlier, such boundaries are often compounded with a topographic and edaphic https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press144 Woodlands and scrub transition to less intractable ground where treatment has been easier to execute and colonisation speedier. Finally, here, topographic alterations to the woodland environment associated with sylvicultural treatments have sometimes modified soil conditions themselves and produced artificial edaphic zonations. Woodbanks, for example, are often better-drained than their surrounds and can provide, in the south-east, a belt of the Primula-Glechoma sub-community terminating (at the wood boundary) or interrupting (within woods) a stretch of the Anemone or Deschampsia sub-community. Where older stands of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland have been cleared and replanted, ancient banks can provide narrow strips of richer field-layer vegetation with Mercurialis, Hyacinthoides and Primula vulgaris, often with interesting relic boundary specimens of Tilia cordata or Carpinus, surviving within tracts of the Hedera sub-community and providing nuclei from which the herbs can subsequently spread. Wood-banks are often too substantial to have been totally destroyed when compartments have been turned over to agricultural use in the past, but ploughing has often evened out natural surface undulations, so any new woodland developing on such sites shows much less variation in the ground topography and soil water content. Quite fre quently, though, ploughing has created patterns of its own, notably ridge-and-furrow and, where woodland has been long established over abandoned farmland, the field-layer herbs can sort themselves over the drier ridges and wetter furrows such that stripes of the Primula- Glechoma and Anemone sub-communities alternate one with the other. Almost always now, stands of the Fraxinus-Acer- Mercurialis woodland in the south-east, whether they comprise whole woods or the marginal parts of more varied sites, have artificially sharp boundaries. Where older woodlands survive intact, the boundaries may be very old, but, even in such cases, stands are invariably very closely hemmed in by intensive agricultural land. Many stands, of course, have been reduced in extent: here the boundaries are younger but generally equally abrupt. The usual picture now is of isolated fragments, often fringed by a narrow band of the shrubs and climbers of the community or by a belt of stabilised Crataegus-Hedera scrub with Rubus-Holcus underscrub below and a basal zone of the Arrhenatheretum, then a sharp transition to an arable crop (the usual pattern over much of East Anglia) or intensive pasture (as in wetter areas like parts of the Midlands). Where zonations are very tight, elements of all these vegetation types may be compressed into a confused mixture that can defy classification. To the north and west, the pattern is a little different. The losses here have also been extensive though, in many places, they have been to commercial forestry, not to agriculture. But, where stands do persist or have developed more recently within stretches of agricultural land, their boundaries are frequently not so sharply defined from the surrounding vegetation. Very often this is pasture of a less improved kind and under less intensive management than in the south-east. Where grazing (it is usually by sheep or mixtures of sheep and cattle) is lighter or more sporadic, stands can develop quite an extensive fringe of Crataegus-Hedera scrub or mixtures of young Fraxinus, Betula spp., Acer pseudoplatanus and Ulmus glabra. A typical picture in many parts of the Yorkshire and Derbyshire Dales is for patchworks of stands of the Geranium sub-community of different ages to be disposed over Carboniferous Limestone scree slopes with intervening stretches of open calcicolous grassland, either the more northerly types of the Festuca-Avenula grassland or Sesleria- dominated swards (e.g. Merton 1970). Where complex surface topography hinders grazing, rather specialised mosaics with herbaceous vegetation can be found. Over Carboniferous Limestone pavements, for example, fragmentary miniaturised stands of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland are frequently found in the deeper, shaded grikes, the canopies of the trees and shrubs browsed and wind-pruned at the level of the pavement surface and the herbs of the community disposed over grike-bottom soil and on small ledges and in crevices. Fern-dominated vegetation often occurs intermixed with the woodland and, where the clefts give way to shallower solution hollows in the more accessible and exposed clint surfaces, the mosaics include developing stands of Sesleria-Galium grassland. The quite common existence of younger stands of the community to the north-west has meant that it has been possible there to monitor its serai development or make deductions about succession from spatial patterns (e.g. Scurfield 1959, Okali 1966, Merton 1970). In the southeast, evidence is more fragmentary: opportunities provided by some early studies, mostly on abandoned farmland, (e.g. Adamson 1912, 1921, Brenchley & Adam 1915, Salisbury 191 Sb, Tansley & Adamson 1925) have largely been lost and neglected open ground is now very rare. The most that can be done here is to collate existing results (e.g. Tansley 1939), add such continuing observations on these sites as there have been (Pigott 1977), set these in the context of the ecology of the mature stands of the community (e.g. Rackham 1980, Peterken 1981) and make some educated guesses. And, also, consider the conclusions in the light of more detailed work on successional development of related communities like the Fagus-Mercurialis and Taxus woodlands (e.g. Watt 1923, 1925, 1926, 1934a, b). This latter is of some considerable importance because it seems clear that, within the natural British range of Fagus, the starting point for the development of https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.013 Published online by Cambridge University PressW8 Fraxinus excelsior-Acer campestre-Mercurialisperennis woodland 145 climax Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland is not usually bare limestone or shallow rendzina soils with calcicolous grasslands. Quercus robur is, in any case, at some disadvantage against Fraxinus in the more excessi vely draining of these situations but, more importantly, neither of these trees can ultimately compete with Fagus, especially in areas like the Chilterns where the climate is drier. Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland certainly can develop over deeper rendzinas carrying swards like those of the Festuca-Avenula grassland (or its less hea vily grazed derivatives dominated by Bromus erectus or Brachypodium pinnatum) and perhaps even from more fragmentary soils over Chalk spoil in quarries and pits (e.g. Tansley 1922, Tansley & Adamson 1925, Hope- Simpson 19406, 19416, Wells 1969, 1973). But, even where rainfall is higher, as in the North and South Downs, it appears to be often a serai stage in the eventual development of beech forest (Watt 1925, 1934a, b). Much more locally, Taxus can overtake young FraxzHws-dominated stands of the community and come to dominate in yew forest (Watt 1926). Much more likely precursors of the Fraxinus-Acer- Mercurialis woodland in the south-east are the more calcicolous forms of mesotrophic grasslands developed over deeper, moister base-rich soils derived from argillaceous bedrocks, like calcareous clays and shales, and calcareous superficials. Here, Quercus robur is very much at home and can maintain its important role amongst the mixtures of more calcicolous trees and shrubs that eventually come to dominate. However, because the vast majority of these soils have been under cultivation (or existing woodland) for very long periods of time, we do not know what the natural course of succession might be. Where the community has arisen secondarily on abandoned farmland, quite diverse lines of development have been seen to converge into young stands of the community. On old arable land with loamy brown earths, early mixtures of weeds have been seen to progress to some kind of Arrhenatheretum, then scrub, then woodland (as on Broadbalk Wilderness: Brenchley & Adam 1915, Tansley 1939); on heavier clay soils (as in Geescroft Wilderness: Brenchley & Adam 1915, Tansley 1939, Pigott 1977), Holcus-Deschampsia grassland has gained a dominant hold and a slower invasion of shrubs and trees has been observed; within abandoned pasture, the more vigorous of the existing grasses have grown rank as woody species have colonised to form ‘tumbledown ’ scrub and then woodland (e.g. Adamson 1912). From what we know of the ecology of existing stands of these precursors and of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland itself, the limits defining the possible development of the community are almost certainly edaphic and, though they are quite wide, these seem to be fairly well defined. On better-drained soils, basestatus is likely to be the controlling factor, so the most obvious precursors will be the Centaurea and Pastinaca sub-communities of the Arrhenatheretum, the Avenula pubescens grassland or, where old pasture runs down, the more calcicolous forms of the Centaureo-Cynosure- tum and the Lolio-Cynosuretum. Less base-rich soils with other sub-communities of these mesotrophic grasslands are likely to develop eventually into the Quercus- Pteridium-Rubus woodland. With increasing soil moisture, the Holcus-Deschampsia grassland, and perhaps also certain kinds of Holco-Juncetum, mark the probable limits of invasion: where waterlogging becomes more extreme, Salix cinerea and Alnus begin to assume importance as invaders and succession moves to wetter kinds of woodland. The major trees of the south-eastern types of Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland can invade these com munities directly, provided there is no undue restriction on colonisation in general by the growth of very rank grasses (like Deschampsia)'. even Quercus robur which now regenerates badly within existing stands of woodland has no difficulty in appearing within old pasture. However, very frequently, there is a preliminary stage of scrub development before the woodland proper, especially where existing grassland is being colonised. In this scrub, Crataegus monogyna is almost invariably a major component and early stages in succession usually converge into the Crataegus-Hedera scrub, through which the trees of the community eventually emerge. The appearance of a stand of the south-eastern kind of Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland with all its diag nostic woody species {Fraxinus, Q. robur, Acer cam pestre, Corylus and Crataegus) does not necessarily take very long: the early studies were dealing with tracts which had already attained this degree of maturity after only 50 years or so. However, it probably takes very much longer for the other woody associates to appear in the kinds of mixtures that are widespread in the southeast with Tilia cordata, Carpinus, Sorbus torminalis and Crataegus laevigata. And, some of the most characteristic herbs of the community are very slow to colonise: young stands are often clearly of the Hedera or, over moister soils, the Deschampsia sub-community. Even after 90 years, the Geescroft woodland had acquired little more than a marginal fringe of Mercurialis (Pigott 1977) and Rackham (1975) estimated that it would take at least another 150 years for the Hayley Triangle (already 50 years old) to acquire something like the herbaceous flora of the older parts of the wood. To the north-west, the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland can also probably develop from mesotrophic swards over more heavy-textured calcareous soils, though, with the higher rainfall here, there is an increased tendency for succession in moister situations to move towards its upland counterpart, the Fraxinus- Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland (as in higher-altitude dale https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press146 Woodlands and scrub heads) or the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland (where there is pronounced local flushing). More fre quently in this region, which is largely outside the natural range of Fagus, the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodland is the culmination of the invasion of bare limestones and shallow, free-draining rendzinas. Its usual precursors are therefore calcicolous grasslands, either the Dicranum sub-community of the Festuca- Avenula grassland (in the Mendips, Derbyshire and Durham), the Sesleria-Scabiosa grassland (in Durham) or the Sesleria-Galium grassland (in the Yorkshire Dales and around Morecambe Bay). Usually, it is grazing which mediates the succession on more accessible slopes here. These often have a somewhat more intact and deeper soil cover, derived by long weathering or from colluvium, glacial drift or loess and, in such situations, Crataegus is again an important early invader, sometimes thickening up to form dense Crataegus-Heder a scrub before being overtaken by colonising trees (Scurfield 1959, Pigott 1969, Merton 1970). Over more broken slopes with scattered outcrops and fine talus intermixed with downwash, Corylus can colonise quickly and, on warmer slopes, it is often accompanied by Cornus sanguinea, Rhamnus, Euonymus and Rosa spp. (in the so-called ‘retrogressive scrub ’ of Moss 1913: see Merton 1970). It is this kind of scrub which seems to persist as the understorey in the more open stands of the Teucrium sub-community (Pigott 1969). Very often, however, and especially on coarser, and even mobile, talus, Fraxinus invades very open herbaceous vegetation in the early stages and, with little or no grazing, it can quickly overtake Crataegus or Corylus and establish the basis of a canopy of Fraxinus-Acer- Mercurialis woodland. Very commonly, too, it is accompanied or sometimes largely replaced by Acerpseudoplatanus'. although this tree is often found associated with disturbed sites (like mine spoil or failed plantations: Merton 1970), its prominence in successions in the region is closely related to the wetness of climate and soil. How well it competes with Fraxinus is unclear: Okali (1966) suggested that it was less tolerant than Fraxinus of sub-optimal conditions, though availability of seed-parents may have been an important factor in the development of the local variation in the relative abundance of these trees that can be seen now (Merton 1970). Clearly, though, both species and, more locally, birch (usually Betula pendula on the drier soils), have behaved almost like woody weeds in the speedy and diverse successions that have given rise to many stands of the Geranium sub-community. Although Merton (1970) reported the presence in scrub of certain herbaceous species usually associated with older stands of north-western Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis woodlands (Convallaria majalis for example), there is again little doubt that it takes some time for developing stands to acquire the full range of canopy and field-layer species. Ulmus glabra is usually slower to colonise than Fraxinus and Acer pseudoplatanus and, towards the north-west, A. campestre is approaching the limit of its range. Quercus, too, has been notably unsuccessful in gaining a place in younger stands. The herbaceous component in the early stages also often has a strong representation of the grassland or open scree species with Arrhenatherum elatius, Brachypodium syl vaticum and Geranium robertianum prominent. The complexity found in the Teucrium sub-community may take many generations to develop and some of its typical species (like Tilia cordata) now regenerate very infrequently. Distribution "