"w9","Zonation and succession Transitions between the two sub-communities of the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland are primarily related to grazing pressure. The Crépis sub-community tends to replace the Typical sub-community in areas inaccessible to large herbivores, like ledges and steeper ravine slopes or pavements with numerous deep grikes (e.g. McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birks 1973, Ratcliffe 1977) and, because of the topographic irregularity of many sites, such zonations are usually complex mosaics with small fragments of the former scattered through the latter. However, there is no doubt that the Crépis sub community attains its most luxuriant development where lack of grazing is combined with abundant soil moisture, so stands also often pick out dripping rock faces or flushed areas. Zonations to other kinds of woodland are usually related more directly and exclusively to changes in parent materials and soil conditions. Where the soils are derived entirely from native bedrocks, a common pat tern is for the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland to give way to the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland as calcareous rocks with more base-rich mull brown earths pass to more acid deposits with leached brown earths with moder or mor humus. Betula pubeseens, Sorbus aucuparia and Corylus may run through both communities, together with Hyacinthoides, Oxalis, Viola riviniana and many of the grasses, but Fraxinus (and Ulmus glabra if it is present) fade, and herbs such as Mercurialis, Geum urbanum and Circaea lutetiana are replaced by Potentilla erecta, Galium saxatile and Pteridium. In regular sequences of limestones or calcareous shales and arenaceous strata, a frequent feature of Carboniferous deposits, this kind of zonation can be well ordered and obvious: in parts of the Yorkshire Dales, for example, where deep valleys have been cut through more or less level-bedded rocks, a typical pattern is for the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland to occupy the valley-side slopes over the Great Scar limestone with the Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland on the brow tops, over Yoredale deposits (Figure 20). Where sequences are less ordered, deposits thinner or https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.014 Published online by Cambridge University PressW9 Fraxinus excelsior-Sorbus aucuparia-Mercurialis perennis woodland 165 Figure 20. Mixed deciduous and oak-birch woodlands at Kisdon Force, North Yorkshire. Topography (a) with (b) the disposition of W9 Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis and W11 Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodlands and (c-e) sections through and across the hollow and spur. steeply inclined and incised by actively-eroding streams into younger irregular ravines, the vegetation patterns can be more complex with small fragments of both kinds of woodland succeeding one another up and across the valley sides. This is a feature of sites on Ordovician and Silurian deposits in Wales and south-east Scotland (Ratcliffe 1977, Ferreira 1978). On many igneous and f \c d (e) W9Wil https://doi.org/10.1017/9780521235587.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press166 Woodlands and scrub metamorphic rocks, more calcareous stretches are exceptional and here very small stands of the Fraxinus- Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland can be found embedded within extensive tracts of Quercus-Betula-Oxalis woodland or, where there is a more marked shift in rock and soil acidity, the Quer eus-Betula-Dicranum woodland, as in north Wales, the Lake district and north-west Scot land (Ratcliffe 1977). The presence of superficial deposits frequently con fuses such zonations. Over more calcareous till or head, the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland can still be extensive but more arenaceous drift may restrict its occurrence over suitable bedrocks and tends to shift the whole sequence of woodlands towards the more calcifu- gous extreme. Very heavy rainfall may have the same effect so that, in the far north-west of Scotland, the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland occupies only the most lithomorphic soils and, even then, can have fragments of much more calcifugous herbaceous vegetation within it on nidus-capped boulders (e.g. McVean & Ratcliffe 1962, Birks 1973). Zonations to woodland on strongly-flushed soils are also quite common and they almost always involve the Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodland, the typical alderwood of more base-rich stagnogleys. Species such as Filipendula ulmaria, Deschampsia cespitosa, Athyrium filix-femina and Lysimachia nemorum remain prominent in this community and Viola riviniana, Oxalis acetosella and Dryopteris dilatata can run some way into the surrounds but increasing Alnus dominance and the appearance of plants like Chrysosplenium oppositifolium, Carex remota, C. pendula and Juncus effusus usually serve as a good distinction. Where flushing is regular, as along an impervious parting, the pattern of repeated slumped triangles of this woodland within stretches of Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland can be very striking. Elsewhere the emergence of ground water is much more disordered and the mosaics consequently more complex. However, the frequent association of the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis, Quercus- Betula-Oxalis and Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodlands on sequences of base-rich, base-poor and gleyed brown earths in the north-west is exactly analogous to zonations of the Fraxinus-Acer-Mercurialis, Quercus- P ter idium-Rubus and Alnus-Fraxinus-Lysimachia woodlands on comparable soils in the south-east, as for example in the Weald. The landscape context of the Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland is usually that of pastoral agriculture along the upland fringes, where stands of the community represent some of the last vestiges of a woodland cover now confined to the more intractable slopes, crags and pavements. Grazing by stock as well as by deer is frequent in the Typical sub-community and this vege tation sometimes gives way, with varying degrees of sharpness, to semi-natural calcicolous pasture. Usually, this is Festuca-Agrostis-Thymus grassland or, in the Pennines, the more surface-leached kinds of Sesleria- Galium grassland or, in northern Scotland, the Dryas- Carex heath (e.g. Birks 1973). Where limestone crops out as pavement, as on the Yorkshire Dales Carboniferous or the Skye Durness Limestone, fragmentary stands of the community can be virtually confined to drift-filled grikes, forming complex mosaics with the grasslands on the clint surfaces (e.g. Birks 1973). Where grazed stretches are flushed, base-rich small-sedge mires, like the Carex-Pinguicula flush, may occur in close juxtaposition with Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland. Although successions to this community have never been studied, such grasslands as those mentioned above would probably revert back to Fraxinus-Sorbus-Mercurialis woodland if neglected: this kind of woodland probably represents the climax vegetation over more calcareous soils in sub-montane and cool oceanic regions. However, on a very local scale, one other kind of agricultural treatment has been important in deflecting progressions to the community. Where tree and shrub cover thins out very substantially in the less- grazed Crépis sub-community, the field layer becomes very similar to the Anthoxanthum-Geranium grassland. This is the vegetation of the unimproved hay-meadows of sub-montane parts of the Pennines and it seems highly likely that such swards have been derived from this woodland by repeatedly setting back invasion of woody plants by an annual mowing for hay (Pigott 1956a, Bradshaw 1962). Zonations between the two communities are rare, but sometimes contiguous stands occur on identical soils, separated only by a wall. Open woodlands very similar to the Crépis sub-community have traditionally been mown in other parts of northern Europe (e.g. Nordhagen 1928, 1943, Sjörs 1954, Böcher 1954). Distribution "